Because of the Atonement, all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one that occurs when we give up. So whatever you do, don’t you dare give up. This is my first opportunity to address you in a devotional as president of the university. Let me begin by telling you, “You look really good.” That is different from being good-looking, though you are that as well. I hope that each of you has some inkling of the spirit you carry with you and the light that radiates from you. It is evident to visitors to the campus—who sometimes struggle to come up with words to describe what they see and feel in your presence. I thank each of you for your individual contribution to what is the real Spirit of the Y that those who come on campus experience so profoundly. It truly is an honor to be your president. Those who have heard me speak these past few months will not be surprised that I begin by quoting a portion of the BYU mission statement, which was approved and adopted by the board of trustees more than thirty years ago. That mission statement describes well both the process and the anticipated results of a BYU education. I urge each of you to read and ponder it, as well as the BYU Aims, as this new year begins. The most familiar line of that mission statement summarizes, in general terms, the details that follow. “The mission of Brigham Young University,” it states, “is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.”1 My remarks today focus on one reality about that quest for perfection. It is a truth that is hard to deny, yet difficult to accept. It is this: We will all fail. More than once. Every day. I know that may sound startling and not the most optimistic of messages, so let me be quick to add that this does not mean that you or I are failures or that the quest for perfection is futile. There is a difference between failing, even repeatedly, and being a failure, as I hope to explain. Failing is an essential part of the mortal phase of our quest for perfection. We don’t often think of it that way, but that is only because we tend to focus too much on the word perfection and not enough on the word quest when we read the mission statement. Failure is an inevitable part of the quest. In our quest for perfection, how we respond when we fail will ultimately determine how well we will succeed. My plea for you today is to learn how to fail successfully. To help you in that regard, let me provide a little broader context for the quest for perfection and the role that failure plays in that process. The primary purpose of our mortal existence is to help us become like our heavenly parents. One of the things we need to do in order to accomplish that purpose is to learn and apply truth in our lives. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that “it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance”2 and that “a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge.”3 Thus learning is an essential part of not only our BYU experience but also this mortal phase of our quest for perfection. The scriptures teach that there are three main ways we can learn: one, by study;4 two, by faith;5 and, three, by experience.6 A lot has been written and spoken at BYU about how we learn by study and by faith,7 but we talk much less about how we learn from experience. Yet learning from experience is one of the essential purposes of our mortal existence. In the book of Abraham the plan we all accepted in the grand premortal council is described as follows: We will go down . . . , and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them.8 This earth, the setting for our mortal existence, was created so that we could “prove” ourselves. But I believe we may not appreciate the full meaning of the word prove in that scripture. In everyday usage the word prove means to demonstrate something that already exists.9 Thus we take final exams to prove what we already know about the material we have been studying that semester. But the Oxford English Dictionary provides an additional meaning for the word prove. It indicates that prove also means “to find out, learn, or know by experience.”10 I believe the opportunity we have to prove ourselves in this life was not designed to allow us to demonstrate to God how obedient we already were before we came to earth. He, and we, already knew that. God formed this earth and gave us this mortal existence so that we could “prove” ourselves in the other sense of that word—so that we could “find out, learn, or know by experience” truths that we did not already know and that we could not learn in any other way. I believe there are certain things, some of them essential to our exaltation, that we can learn only through experience. We could not have remained in our premortal condition, memorized all the attributes of godhood, and then, after passing a written exam, become like our heavenly parents. We came to earth to “prove” ourselves, to learn from our own experiences how to know good from evil and other important lessons we could learn only by our own experience. And one of the best ways we can fully learn those essential lessons is by failing in our efforts. Let me illustrate with a simple experience from my own professional life. Two years after I graduated from law school I found myself working on a tax law project for a partner in a law firm in Phoenix, Arizona. By that time I had not only finished law school but had completed judicial clerkships for two very good judges at two of the best courts in the country and had passed the bar exam. In my mind I knew how to be a lawyer. Even though I had not had any tax law experience before I received the assignment, I knew quite well where to begin looking for the answer to the question posed to me by the partner. After extensive research of the applicable statutes, regulations, and cases—and after revising several drafts—I confidently presented to the partner a memo that I felt answered his question. The partner quickly skimmed the memo, read the conclusion, and then confidently opined, “This can’t be the law.” I was quite taken aback and a little offended. “I’ve read the statutes, the regulations, and the cases,” I responded. “That’s what they say.” “I don’t care,” he retorted. “Tax law in this area can’t work the way you’ve described it. Go try again.” It was, to use the term my children often use to describe my less glorious moments, an “epic failure.” After further discussing the issue with the partner, I examined the problem from several angles that started at different points from the one at which I had first begun. Over time a different analysis appeared—one that changed the answer to the question in a subtle but important way. When I presented a revised memo to the partner with a more in-depth analysis and a different answer, he was satisfied. I asked him at that point whether he had known the answer to the question all along and was just trying to make work for me. “No,” he replied, “I really didn’t. I just know how these kinds of businesses work, and I have a pretty good feel for tax law. Your earlier approach just didn’t seem right.” I knew how to acquire abstract legal information; I even knew how to analyze that information in theoretical terms. The partner, however, knew how to be a lawyer—and there is a difference between those two things, just as there is a difference between knowing the attributes of God in an abstract sense and making those attributes a part of our character, which is what our quest for perfection requires. How do we learn that latter important skill? The partner helped me understand that as well. When I asked him what it was that allowed him to almost intuit the right answer to the problem, he replied, “It takes good judgment.” “And how do you acquire good judgment?” I asked. “Good judgment,” he said, “comes from experience.” Then, after pausing for just a few seconds and with only a hint of a smile, he added, “And experience comes from bad judgment.” In other words, from failing. As one motivational speaker observed: We always think of failure as the antithesis of success, but it isn’t. Success often lies just the other side of failure.11 The lesson is so prevalent in life that three years ago the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of that publication to the topic of how to learn from failures. 12 We can see the same lesson in the familiar experience of Nephi when he was given the assignment to obtain the brass plates from Laban. As we know, his first two efforts failed, but he persisted and ultimately succeeded. In the process he discovered the power of being “led by the Spirit,” 13 a critical lesson that he may not have learned if the first effort to persuade Laban to release the plates had been successful. Nephi’s life was forever changed in a positive way because he failed twice—and, more important, because of the way he responded to those failures. Thus failing is a critical component of our eternal progress—our quest for perfection. And because of the Atonement we can—if we respond to failures in the right way—be blessed with a new kind of learning that allows our failures to become part of the perfecting process. As Elder Bruce C. Hafen has explained, the beauty of the gospel is that “because of the Atonement, we can learn from our mistakes without being condemned by them.”14 What a wonderful blessing that absolutely marvelous and indispensable portion of the plan of salvation provides to each of us, if we will but take advantage of it. This does not mean that we should try to fail as often as we can. “Not all failures are created equal.”15 In one of the articles in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Amy C. Edmondson noted that in business there are three main kinds of failures, some of which are better than others. First, there are failures that result from the lack of precision in routine but important matters—for example, a failure to follow design specifications in the manufacturing process. According to Professor Edmondson, these are “bad” failures that are preventable and should be eliminated as quickly as possible. Second, there are failures that are the inevitable results of complexity in processes—mistakes made in uncontrollable situations, such as in triage in a hospital emergency room. These failures are unavoidable and cannot be controlled, but they can be managed. Finally, there are failures that occur when researchers try to push the frontiers of knowledge with regard to a product or service—failures made by a research lab in developing a new product, for example. These failures can be “good” failures if structured in the right way because they can accelerate the learning process.16 If we are to fail successfully—if failure is to move us along in our quest for perfection—we need to make similar distinctions in our daily efforts and daily failures. In our own personal lives, willful failure in important, routine things we can control constitutes sin, which we should avoid as much as possible. In things that are routine but essential to our eternal progress—things like daily prayer, daily scripture study, and regular church attendance—we should strive to eliminate all failings. In these matters we can come very close to perfection very quickly, and it is important that we do so, because success in these endeavors provides the secure foundation that allows us to deal effectively with the other two kinds of failure. When determining what things fall into this first category of failure, we might profitably ask ourselves two questions: One, are these things entirely within our control? And, two, are they things that in the long run really matter? There is a correlation between affirmative answers to those two questions. As Elder Hafen once observed: One way to distinguish what matters a great deal from what does not matter so much is to ask whether the subject is within our control. If it is, then it probably matters enough to merit our attention. But if the subject of our fretting is inherently beyond our control, it is not likely that God will hold us responsible for our ultimate success or failure as to that concern.17 At the other end of Professor Edmondson’s failure spectrum—“good failures” resulting from efforts to extend the frontiers of our knowledge—we should not be so fearful of failing that we avoid trying new or hard things merely because their very newness or difficulty increases the risk of failure. Don’t let concern for protecting your grade point average dictate the courses you take. Challenge yourself, academically and in other ways. You may discover skills, talents, and joys you would otherwise miss out on. Your mortal experience will be a more productive part of your quest for perfection if you intentionally stretch yourself with new challenges, especially those that involve a real risk of failure. As someone once observed, “If you aren’t in over your head, how do you know how tall you are?”18 Maybe our most difficult challenge is to deal with the second category of failures—those that are not willful sin or intentional calculated risks but rather the unavoidable, uncontrollable failures that occur because of the messiness of life, because of factors beyond our direct control. What do you do when, for the first time in your life, you get an A− or a B or a D, even though you have worked very hard? Or when you try your best but you still don’t make the Women’s Chorus? Or when the relationship you are pursuing falls apart? Or even when all these things and more important ones seem to go wrong at the same time and you feel completely alone, overwhelmed, and totally a failure? What do you do then? Let me suggest you follow the advice given in Hebrews 10:35: “Cast not away . . . your confidence.” You have not arrived at this point in your lives without having accomplished much, as Peggy has just explained. I know you may sometimes feel like the least intelligent, least talented, and most socially awkward student who has ever set foot on this campus, but you were not admitted to this university on a whim. The process is better than that. And you are better than that. More important, you have the potential to be much better than that. Remembering what you have already accomplished and understanding your full potential can contribute to the development of the kind of emotional, physical, mental, and spiritual resilience that will allow you, in the words of the BYU mission statement, to meet “personal challenge and change.”19 Professor Martin E. P. Seligman, one of the founders of positive psychology, has observed that the most common characteristic of those who are able to overcome almost any kind of uncontrollable failure is that they are optimistic.20 And the good news is that people can be taught to some degree “to think like optimists.”21 One way Professor Seligman suggests is by helping people view setbacks as things that are “[1] temporary, [2] local, and [3] changeable.”22 In other words, they react to failures by thinking, “[1] It’s going away quickly, [2] it’s just this one situation, and [3] I can do something about it.”23 That process, studies have shown, is aided by recalling past successes24 and recognizing individual strengths that we have.25 Eternal gospel truths, available to us through modern revelation, make this kind of optimistic thinking even easier. For example, we know that each of us “is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.”26 Thus we have much greater strengths and talents than we realize. Moreover, we are promised that, from an eternal perspective, our “adversity and . . . afflictions shall be but a small moment.”27 Thus we can be certain that whatever we are going through will be temporary. Finally, we can be assured that however we have failed, it can, from an eternal perspective, be changed. The Atonement is that powerful and that comprehensive. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland put it: If you are lonely, please know you can find comfort. If you are discouraged, please know you can find hope. . . . If you feel you are broken, please know you can be mended.28 Because of the Atonement, all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one that occurs when we give up. So whatever you do, don’t you dare give up. What I am suggesting is not simply an affirmation of the power of positive thinking; it is a recognition of the power of the gospel of Jesus Christ—the perspective it gives us, the truths it provides, and “the infinite virtue of [Christ’s] atoning sacrifice”29 that is available to us all. Yes, I am asking you to trust yourself more, but, more important, I am asking you to trust God. I urge you—in your moments of doubt and despair, in the times when you think you have failed and you think you can’t make it right—to focus more on Him and less on yourselves. Too often we ask the wrong question when we fail. We ask, “Am I good enough?” But the real question is, “Is God good enough?” Is He as good as He says He is? Can He really deliver on His promise that “all things” will “work together for [our] good”30 if we will trust Him and strive to do the best we can and keep going whenever we fall short? I testify that He is. God is as good, as powerful, as loving, as patient, and as consistent as He says He is. If we will but focus on the eternal truths He has made available to us, both through institutional revelation and through personal promptings and reassurances, He will turn all our failures into successes. I bear my witness that He lives and loves us with a love we cannot comprehend. He gave His Son so that we might move forward in our quest for perfection with full confidence and assurance that we will succeed despite our failures. I bear my solemn witness of these truths and express my love and God’s love for each of you, in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> Our efforts to enhance inspiring learning—the kind of education for eternity described in our mission statement—can have an enormous impact on all of our students. But it need not and should not end there. It is a joy to be with you this morning. There is something about the beginning of a new school year that brings hope and optimism. Perhaps it is the chance to start out fresh—no matter how challenging the prior semester has been. Perhaps it is the promise that fall, with its crisp air and changing leaves—and, for me, football season—will soon arrive. Hopefully for all of us it is the thrill you feel in being involved in the intellect-expanding, soul-­refining, celestializing endeavor in which we are all engaged. This last year has brought many successes and a few challenges. Since we last met in this setting, more than 7,700 of our students graduated and moved on to the next phase of their lifelong learning process. During their stay here, many accomplished great things, ranging from receiving a Truman Scholarship to temple marriage. Others excelled as they represented the university in various settings. The BYU Ballroom Dance Company won the Blackpool competition in modern formation, a feat they have accomplished every time since 1989 that their three-year cycle has taken them back to England. They also took first place in Latin American formation—another repeat championship. The men’s volleyball team, the men’s rugby team, and the women’s rugby team all competed in their respective national championship games, all on the same day. Hopefully you can identify and celebrate other successes in your areas. They are evident all around us. Improvements have also been made to our campus infrastructure. We completed fund-raising for the new Engineering Building, and construction is now underway. Expansion of the Harman Building has begun, in large part to expand the online learning environment here on campus, and the new Marriott Center Annex, housing our men’s and women’s basketball teams, is nearing completion. My thanks to all those involved in these and numerous other projects on campus. We have also faced challenges in this past year—challenges that give us opportunities to improve. As I am sure you are all aware, we are examining in depth the reporting process for our students and other aspects of the way we handle sexual assault cases. It causes us deep sorrow to know that members of our community would be victimized in such a devastating way. We are anxious to help them. A group of faculty and administrators have worked tirelessly during the summer to help us know how best to do that. We anticipate that this fall the advisory council will present their recommendations to the President’s Council. We will then address the topic with the campus community more in depth. In the meantime, let me emphasize that the top priority in this extensive effort is the safety and well-being of our students, especially those who have been the victims of sexual assault. Efforts will continue until sexual assault is eliminated from our campus environment. Learning at Brigham Young University I think by now you know me well enough to correctly predict that my message today will somehow focus on the mission statement. I continue to be impressed with how the language in this three-decade-old document sheds clarifying light on many of the new situations, new challenges, and new opportunities we encounter. I believe there was inspiration in the creation of that document and that inspiration will come from continued reflection on its principles. So, as we reflect on this year’s conference theme, which reminds us that “the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind,”1 I hope that what occupies a good portion of our hearts and minds is the role we are to play in assisting our students “in their quest for perfection and eternal life.”2 The mission statement makes it clear that our primary role in that process is to help our students learn. We are to provide them “a period of intensive learning.”3 That phrase describes the rigor of the learning experience our students should have. Other portions of the mission statement describe the content and outcomes of that learning. In terms I hope are now familiar to all of you, the mission statement indicates that, above all else, our students should learn “the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.”4 In addition, they should experience learning that is “broad”—learning that enables them to think clearly, communicate effectively, understand important ideas in their own cultural tradition as well as that of others, and establish clear standards of intellectual integrity.5 Our students should also experience learning “in the special fields of their choice”— learning that will enable them to compete “with the best in their fields.”6 In addition, they should experience learning that renders them not only . . . capable of meeting personal challenge and change but . . . also [of bringing] strength to others in the tasks of home and family life, social relationships, civic duty, and service to mankind.7 The Aims document effectively boils all these down to four main points: we are to provide learning that is “(1) spiritually strengthening, (2) intellectually enlarging, and (3) character building, leading to (4) lifelong learning and service.”8 Notice how each aim is directly connected to specific portions of the mission statement. The spiritually strengthening aim links to specific portions of the mission statement. The intellectually enlarging aim links to other portions, as does the character building aim. Other sections of the mission statement explain the lifelong learning and service aim. And there are even more links. These convey the truth that one cannot fully understand the aims unless one fully understands the mission statement. While the aims may be easier to remember—I venture to guess that more people can recite the aims than can provide a word-for-word rendition of the mission statement—they are not independent and freestanding ideas that supplement the mission statement. They derive directly from the mission statement and provide a shorthand description of its key learning principles. The Term “Inspiring Learning” Perhaps out of a desire to simplify things as much as possible—and perhaps as a result of a diminishing capacity to remember even four things—but largely in an effort to succinctly explain what we are about in a way that allows people to easily remember, I have tried to simplify the core learning goals even more while still emphasizing that a full understanding requires a return to the mission statement. After discussions with many of you in many settings, I have concluded that one two-word description that achieves that end is “inspiring learning.” Note again that one cannot understand the full meaning of the term “inspiring learning” without a full understanding of the mission statement. Just as the Aims document is a summary and not a replacement for the mission statement, the two-word description “inspiring learning” is a summary and not a replacement. Inspiring is an interesting word. It derives from the Latin term inspirare, which means “to breathe into” and, more specifically, “to breathe life into.”9 Inspiring is both a noun and an adjective. The noun can be defined as the act of inspiring or motivating. In this sense, the term “inspiring learning” describes actions that inspire or motivate students to learn. As an adjective, inspiring is a modifier. In this context it describes a kind of learning: learning that inspires—or, more precisely, in our setting, learning that leads to inspiration or revelation. When I use the term “inspiring learning,” I have in mind both meanings of the word inspiring. I hope we inspire our students to learn. And I hope that learning leads to inspiration. When both things happen, inspiring learning occurs, and we can then know we are on the right track to achieve the core goals set forth in our mission statement. While the term “inspiring learning” may not be familiar to you, my guess is that many of you are familiar with the phenomenon. Inspiring learning occurs in many of our classrooms for many of our students on a regular basis. Indeed, it may happen so often that we fail to appreciate how exhilarating it can be. We grow used to it. Sometimes it takes someone from outside the university to point it out to us. Here is one example. This past January, New York University professor of journalism Jay Rosen came to campus as a guest lecturer. Let me share with you what he posted shortly after his visit: This was the scene a few days ago when I gave a guest lecture at Brigham Young University, which of course is a Mormon school. . . . A most unusual thing happened before I was introduced. Unusual for me, normal at Brigham Young. Dale Cressman, who organized the event and guided me around campus, asked a student to begin the event with a prayer. The student stood and prayed for help in “feeling grateful for the opportunity to learn.” I wish more college students felt that way and expressed it as well as she did. I found the BYU students a joy to teach. They were extremely engaged. With good humor they tolerated me asking and reasking them the same question ten times, answering in a slightly different way each time, which allowed me to make a new point in response. After the talk, at least a dozen of them thanked me, and each one shook my hand, looked me in the eye, and made a personal connection. “Grateful for the opportunity to learn” . . . that wasn’t just words to them. It was one of the best experiences I have had in 30 years as a professor.10 That is an example of inspiring learning. And classrooms are the central places in which that kind of learning occurs. I hope we can make each of our classrooms a place of inspiring learning, a place in which students become excited about learning and in which that learning leads to revelation. Learning by Experience While it is essential that our formal classrooms be sites of inspiring learning, that by itself will not completely fulfill our mission. Let me return to the mission statement, this time to the second paragraph: All instruction, programs, and services at BYU, including a wide variety of extracurricular experiences, should make their own contribution toward the balanced development of the total person.11 Note “all instruction,” including “a wide variety of extracurricular experiences.” Some of the most important inspiring learning opportunities occur outside the formal classroom setting through experiences that are, in that sense, extracurricular. And, without implying either that we have fully perfected classroom instruction or that we are going to emphasize classroom instruction less, let me suggest that one way we can enhance the quality of inspiring learning at BYU is to expand both the quantity and quality of the kind of learning that occurs outside the formal ­classroom—the kind of instruction that many call “experiential learning.” Just like classroom learning, experiential learning can produce the kind of inspiring learning that our mission statement challenges us to provide. Experiential learning has become somewhat of a buzzword in academia in recent years. However, for us there is a deeper, even doctrinal reason for pursuing learning by experience in a systematic way. We are all quite familiar with the scriptural injunction that we “seek learning, even by study and also by faith.”12 That describes two key ways by which we learn important truths: by study and by faith. But those are not the only ways by which we learn essential knowledge and skills. Gospel teaching instructs us that we learn by study, we learn by faith, and we learn by experience. Learning by experience is a central purpose of our mortal journey. As Elder David A. Bednar once observed, “Learning by faith and from experience are two of the central features of the Father’s plan of happiness.”13 We could not have simply memorized celestial laws in our premortal life and declared ourselves fit for the celestial kingdom. We needed to come to this mortal existence to experience certain things we could not experience in our premortal life and to learn from those experiences. Experience is a key part of our mortal learning process. Similarly, students cannot learn all they need to learn by memorizing or even discussing principles in a classroom, as exhilarating as that may be. Experience connects theory with application and deepens our understanding of the principles and truths we learn. And, in my view, experiential learning can be inspiring learning in both senses of that term. It can both inspire students to deeper learning and be the type of learning that leads to inspiration. There is ample evidence that experiential learning can inspire and excite students to learn in ways that have a deep and long-lasting impact. Describing the results of his study about student learning at Harvard, Professor Richard J. Light observed: I assumed that most important and memorable academic learning goes on inside the classroom, while outside activities provide a useful but modest supplement. The evidence shows that the opposite is true. . . . When we asked students to think of a specific, critical incident or moment that had changed them profoundly, four-fifths of them chose a ­situation or event outside of the classroom.14 Likewise, in a 2008 study, George D. Kuh, the founding director of the widely used National Survey of Student Engagement (NSSE), identified ten teaching and learning practices that have especially high impact on students. Five of those—including such things as internships, service learning, and undergraduate research—involved activities that would easily fit into the category of experiential learning.15 Other studies underscore the point. A 2014 survey of approximately 30,000 college students conducted by Purdue University and the Gallup Poll evaluated the relationship between various college experiences and subsequent success at work and overall life well-being. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work engagement and well-being with various college experiences. The results were telling. Workplace success did not correlate with the size of the university attended, large or small, or with whether the university was private or public. But other factors did seem to matter. Specifically, the study found that the chances that individuals would thrive at work—the highest measure of work ­engagement—doubled if during college they “had an internship or job where they were able to apply what they were learning in the classroom, were actively involved in extracurricular activities and organizations, and worked on projects that took a semester or more to complete.”16 The first two clearly involve experiential learning; the third may as well. Evidence from our own campus also illustrates the ways in which experiences outside the classroom can inspire students to learn. Let me cite as one example the Phage Hunters program in the College of Life Sciences. This program enlists students early on—sometimes as freshmen on their very first day of class—to begin original research. The students collect soil samples and for the next two semesters work to isolate and identify a bacteriophage that has never been seen before. One project involved students working under the direction of Professor Sandra Hope, who was searching for a viable way to treat a disease that affects honeybee hives. Notice in this video the involvement of the students. [A video presentation was shown.] As noted, the student most prominently featured in the video, Bryan Merrill, signed up for the Phage Hunters class as a sophomore. After completing the class, Bryan was hired as a TA and worked as a research assistant and mentor to other students in the class. By the time he graduated from BYU with his master’s degree in molecular biology, Bryan had already published (or copublished) eight research articles and had worked on twenty-three genome sequences. He is currently pursuing a doctoral degree in microbiology and immunology at Stanford University. Bryan’s initial experience with phages clearly inspired lifelong and career-enhancing learning. I believe such experiential learning activities can also help students learn to be inspired. Given the nature of the phenomenon being measured, there are no academic studies—at least none that I could find—that address the impact that experiential learning may have on a person’s ability to receive inspiration or revelation. But there is other evidence that, at this unique institution, is at least as persuasive. We are all familiar with the Book of Mormon account of Lehi’s sons going back to Jerusalem to obtain the plates of brass. In a sometimes overlooked portion of that account, Lehi noted three times that the Lord commanded him that he should send his sons back to get the plates,17 thereby making it clear that Lehi was not supposed to do this himself. Having been the father of sons who were the ages of Nephi and his brethren at the time, I have some sense that had Lehi been given the simple direction just to go get the plates, he would have attended to the task himself. It would have been simpler and easier. That is how it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, the Lord made it clear that Lehi was to send his sons. Why? I suggest that at least part of the reason is that the Lord wanted Nephi and his brethren to have an experiential learning opportunity. It may have been easier and faster for Lehi to get the plates himself, but God was not interested just in getting the plates. He was also interested—more interested—in helping Lehi’s sons in their quest for perfection and eternal life. And He furthered that process by providing those sons with a learning experience that caused at least one of them, Nephi, to receive inspiration. When Nephi returned to the camp after that learning experience, he came back not only with the plates but with a greater faith in God and a greater understanding of how inspiration comes. He had experienced inspiring learning. Nephi’s experience in obtaining the plates—or, more precisely, Lehi’s experience in facilitating that experience—demonstrates an important truth about the kind of inspiring learning that comes from experience. It requires that the teacher have great patience and a clear understanding of the larger purpose involved. Perhaps as a result of God’s commanding him multiple times that he should send his sons, Lehi came to realize that, as important as the plates were—and they were of great importance, as demonstrated by the fact that Nephi took Laban’s life to obtain them—securing their possession was not the main object of the experience. The main purpose was to refine Lehi’s children, who were also God’s children. Similarly, as important as our research may be—and some of it is of enormous importance, some of it life-changing, even lifesaving—it is, in the long run, not as important as the ­eternal development of our students. I applaud and admire the way so many of you pursue both these ends with full purpose of heart and mind, without sacrificing either. But it is hard work. Again, one illustration will stand as proxy for numerous others that might be provided. [A video presentation was shown.] Taking students, especially undergraduate students, into such projects as the Antarctica study of nematodes requires a great amount of perspective and faith. In an email, Professor Byron J. Adams explained: Supporting a single human being in Antarctica is the most expensive, most difficult, and most precious part of doing research down there. If something happens and a single slot opens up . . . , we have [to select] a person best suited to help with the project. . . . Most of the time that means bringing down other famous scientists, or postdoctoral fellows [who] are highly skilled in a single area. However, on several occasions I’ve been able to justify bringing students down because I can train them very well . . . on exactly what they need to do. And because my students have always been exceptionally awesome (hard working, skilled, fun to be around), my colleagues are happy to have them on the team. So far, six different students have accompanied Professor Adams to Antarctica, three of them undergraduates. This coming year he will take two other graduate students. And while there are risks, there are also enormous rewards. Professor Adams reported: The first undergrad I brought to Antarctica is now a faculty member in another department in my college. The second one is a faculty member at the University of California, Riverside. The third is just beginning his medical residency in OB/GYN. The first grad student I brought down is now a geneticist at a USDA research center; the rest are still in my program working toward graduation. Enhancing Inspiring Learning at BYU Inspiring learning requires faith both by the students and by the faculty member. It is not an easy task, but it is an inspiring one. So we might ask ourselves: What can we do to enhance the impact of these kinds of ­inspiring learning experiences at BYU in the coming year and in the coming years? Let me make three simple suggestions. First, we can expand the number of students who have a meaningful experiential ­learning opportunity. We can, for example, look for ways to provide more faculty mentoring opportunities for them. The impact of faculty mentoring can be enormous. In a report summarizing a large number of academic studies, clinical psychologist and professor of psychology W. Brad Johnson said: Compared to nonmentored individuals, those with mentors tend to be more satisfied with their careers, enjoy more promotions and higher income, report greater commitment to the organization or profession, and are more likely to mentor others in turn.18 The impact is even greater at a place like BYU, where we are interested in more than academic or temporal success. Because we challenge faculty members to be leaders in their fields of research and because we also ask them to be faithful in the gospel, BYU faculty members provide living examples of the power of learning by study and by faith. Students can first see, then work with, and eventually emulate role models who have demonstrated that they can excel in both their fields and their faithfulness. Experience of that kind is truly inspiring in both senses of the word. However, there is a limit to the number of faculty mentorship opportunities we can provide. As good as they are, our faculty have only twenty-four hours in a day, and they are already stretched almost to the limit. Fortunately, other experiential learning opportunities can also promote inspiring learning. Internships, study abroad programs, fieldwork, service learning opportunities, and even on-campus work are all experiences that, when properly structured, can provide opportunities to both inspire students to learn and help students learn to be inspired. To increase the number of students who can have such experiences, this year the university provided substantial additional funding to each college, with the central stipulation that the funds be directed to students to facilitate a structured experiential learning opportunity. Because the calendar year is not yet complete, it is too early to measure the overall impact of this increased funding in terms of the number of students having such opportunities. However, anecdotal reports from every college indicate that the funds have allowed numerous students to have an experiential learning opportunity that they otherwise would have had to forego for economic reasons. The results have been encouraging—enough that we are working to provide additional funding again in 2017 and to make securing even more funds one of the top fund-raising priorities for the university. Second, in addition to increasing the number of opportunities for inspiring learning experiences, we can work to make the opportunities have even more impact by being more purposeful and intentional about what happens in those activities. While traveling in a foreign country can be a life-changing experience, through careful and thoughtful planning, the impact of the experience can be magnified severalfold. Similarly, internships provide insights into the skills required to succeed in an occupation, but increased planning and foresight can make the experience considerably more meaningful by ensuring that certain kinds of activities occur and that there is adequate opportunity for reflection. I challenge all involved in such activities to make sure we are maximizing the amount of good that can result from them. Finally, we can increase the number of inspiring learning moments for our students if we recognize that both experiential learning and classroom learning are enhanced by the quality of the relationships we develop with our students. Research has shown that “high impact [learning] practices are powerful in part because they are relationship rich.”19 The 2014 Gallup-Purdue survey I mentioned earlier found that one of the key factors that correlated with success in both work engagement and overall well-being was a high-quality relationship with a faculty member. According to that data, a graduate’s chances of thriving at work and in life doubled if the student “had a professor who cared about them as a person, made them excited about learning, and encouraged them to pursue their dreams.”20 BYU should be a leader in this regard. Our mission statement provides that all relationships within the BYU community should reflect devout love of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor.21 If our students feel this, they will be inspired to learn, and they will learn to be inspired in profound ways. Let me share one example. Four years ago one of our graduate engineering students, Shannon Zirbel, received a $100,000 fellowship from NASA to work on a project with laminate-compliant mechanisms in space. She received a lot of attention, and we used her success in our fund-raising efforts for the new Engineering Building. People resonated with the idea that their donations might help bright students like Shannon be involved in cutting-edge work. She was very articulate and very gracious to share her time in informing people about her work as part of our fund-raising effort. It was only some time later that I learned the more complete story of her BYU experience that led to the fellowship. I share portions of her account with her permission: When I graduated from high school, I went to [Georgetown] University. . . . I had a misconception about BYU—I thought girls just came here to get married, . . . so I didn’t even apply to BYU. . . . Two years later I went on a mission. During my mission I served with several companions who were students at BYU, and my opinion of BYU changed entirely. When I came home from my mission, I applied to and was accepted at BYU. . . . I’m not brilliant. But I work hard, so I know I can accomplish good things, and hard things. But I need ready reassurance. Maybe it’s because I’m a [woman]. A [woman] in a male-dominated field, surrounded by men who, by nature, think differently than I do. Do you know how hard that is sometimes? One of my biggest concerns about staying for a PhD was the qualifying exams. Just prior to my taking them . . . , Dr. [Larry] Howell gave me a blessing. Being able to receive a priesthood blessing from my advisor was one of the highlight experiences of attending BYU. Every morning of the exam week I went in to get “words of encouragement” from Dr. Howell. On Wednesday morning (before the dynamics exam), as I was leaving his office, I said, “I’ll try to make you proud.” He replied, “You already have.” Can I tell you how much of a difference that made for me? I went into the exam feeling blissful, feeling like I didn’t have anything I needed to prove. I just had to do my best, and that was going to be enough. He couldn’t have said anything more perfect. I’ve had many experiences like that with professors at BYU, where they have shown such genuine concern for me. Inspiring learning will be greatly enhanced if those with whom we interact feel Christ’s love for them through us. Our efforts to enhance inspiring learning—the kind of education for eternity described in our mission statement—can have an enormous impact on all of our students. But it need not and should not end there. You will shortly hear from Elder Kim B. Clark about a new global initiative in the Church Educational System—an effort to provide learning to Saints and others throughout the world. This initiative is inspiring and will give us the opportunity to magnify the impact of what we do here. However, I believe we can best accomplish that by focusing on our principal and board-directed role, which is to enhance the learning experience of our students in all the ways described in the mission statement. We need not alter or change our focus; we simply need to do well—to do better—what we are already doing and then look for new ways to share. The mission statement succinctly sums up how we can best help in words that, though written nearly thirty-five years ago, seem somehow to have this initiative specifically in mind: In meeting these objectives BYU’s faculty, staff, students, and administrators should also be anxious to make their service and scholarship available to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in furthering its work worldwide.22 We should be anxious to make our service and scholarship available to the Church in this exciting worldwide endeavor, but we can best do so by meeting the objectives set forth in the mission statement. Our mission is clear and simple. It can, in one sense, be captured in the phrase “inspiring learning.” But it is more accurately and more fully described in our inspiring and inspired mission statement. As we face the opportunities and challenges of the coming year, I urge you to return to that mission statement often and to contemplate what your role is in carrying out that mission. I promise that as you do so, inspiration will come. It will come to you and it will come to your students. You are not here by accident and they are not here by accident. Our coming together will allow God’s work to go forward, both in our own individual lives and in the lives of others on this campus and throughout the world. I so testify, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> If you make and keep sacred covenants, if you prepare yourself daily for spiritual experiences through scripture study and prayer, if you align and bind yourselves with God, a light will emanate from you. Every April the Area Seventies from throughout the world gather in Salt Lake City, along with the General Authorities and general auxiliary presidencies, for instruction from members of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the Presidency of the Seventy. The instruction focuses on the most fundamental and most pressing issues of the Church—things like temple work, strengthening members, the Atonement, and hastening the work of salvation. It is a privilege to sit at the feet of these inspired leaders and to learn what is on their minds and in their hearts. Two years ago, in April 2013, President Thomas S. Monson addressed the group and spent all of his time talking about just one topic: you—the youth of the Church. Think about that. Of all the important things that President Monson could have addressed—missionary work, temples, or Church leadership—he said that it was the youth of the Church that had been on his mind the most. He noted that as youth today, you are living in a time of infinite promise, a time when you will face unique challenges. He observed that you are truly a royal generation, reserved to come forth in this special time for particular purposes. President Monson’s remarks reminded me of two comments made by Elder Neal A. Maxwell. Speaking to youth at a BYU fireside a number of years ago, Elder Maxwell said: The highest compliment I can pay to you is that God has placed you here and now at this time to serve in his kingdom; so much is about to happen in which you will be involved and concerning which you will have some great influence.1 In another setting Elder Maxwell provided some additional context for that statement. Referring to the early days of this dispensation, he stated: The Church has done many difficult things, and from these achievements one would not wish to detract. But all the easy things the Church has had to do have been done. From now on it is high adventure!2 Now, Elder Maxwell did not say that everything the early Saints did was easy. Clearly that was not the case. Those early stalwart Church members faced challenges that were daunting—challenges that would test the souls of the most valiant of us. However, Elder Maxwell did say that all the “easy things” that needed to be done have been done. “From now on, it is high adventure!” You have been reserved to come to earth at this time of high adventure because God knows you are capable of meeting the challenges which that adventure will bring. Today I would like to discuss with you a few ideas about what you might do to prepare yourselves to successfully encounter the high adventure that lies ahead of you, both individually and as members of God’s kingdom here on earth. My advice begins with a scriptural admonition, one that some of you will recognize as the Young Men and Young Women theme from two years ago: “Stand in holy places.”3 If you are to succeed in your role in the high adventure that is in your future, you must be grounded in the strength that comes from worthily being in holy places, where you can feel and be strengthened by the Spirit. As the Church handbook makes clear, those “holy places include temples . . . and chapels.”4 Regular church and temple attendance will bring great power in your lives—power you will need to face both the everyday and the extraordinary challenges you will encounter. But in today’s world, more will be expected of you than to just stand in holy places. My plea is not just that you stand in holy places but that you make holy the places in which you stand. As Sister Sharon G. Larsen, a former member of the Young Women general presidency, once explained: Holy places can be wherever you are—alone, in a crowd, with strangers, with friends. The road to Jericho was treacherous and formidable. Thieves infiltrated the bushes and trees waiting to ambush any traveler. It took a kind and courageous Samaritan to change that road from a haunted place to a holy place.5 As followers of Christ, we are capable of doing more than standing in holy places. We can make any place holy—not just our temples and chapels but also our homes, our workplaces, and our locker rooms. We have the ability, like the good Samaritan, to change the areas in which we stand from haunted places to holy places. Elder Jeffrey R. Holland illustrated how this can happen when he spoke of the experience of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail. If there were any place likely to be considered unholy or haunted, it would be that small jail, located near the western frontier of America, in the winter of 1838–39. As described by Elder Holland: The jail . . . was considered escape proof, and it probably was. It had two stories. The . . . main floor was accessible to the outside world only by a single small, heavy door. In the middle of that floor was a trapdoor through which prisoners were then lowered into the lower floor or dungeon. The outside walls . . . were . . . two feet thick, with inside walls of 12-inch . . . logs. These two walls were separated by a 12-inch space filled with loose rock. Combined, these walls made a . . . virtually impenetrable barrier four feet thick.6 Joseph and his companions spent more than four months in that setting. Elder Holland continued: The food given to the prisoners was coarse and sometimes contaminated, so filthy that one of them said they “could not eat it until [they] were driven to it by hunger.” On as many as four occasions they had poison administered to them in their food, making them so violently ill that for days they alternated between vomiting and a kind of delirium, not really caring whether they lived or died. In the Prophet Joseph’s letters, he spoke of the jail being a “hell, surrounded with demons . . . where we are compelled to hear nothing but blasphemous oaths, and witness a scene of blasphemy, and drunkenness and hypocrisy, and debaucheries of every description.”7 Elder Holland included further descriptions from Joseph Smith’s letters: “We have . . . not blankets sufficient to keep us warm; and when we have a fire, we are obliged to have almost a constant smoke.”8 “Our souls have been bowed down”9 and “my nerve trembles from long confinement.”10 “Pen, or tongue, or angels [could not describe] the malice of hell that I have suffered.”11 That is not the kind of place that you or I would describe as holy. And yet it was in that setting that the Prophet received and recorded some of the most sublime revelations of this dispensation, including sections 121, 122, and 123 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The outpouring of the Holy Spirit was so profound in that jail that B. H. Roberts, as Elder Holland noted, rightly referred to it as a “prison-temple.”12 Surely if such a place can become holy, then the places in which we find ourselves can similarly be altered. Once again, as Sister Larsen stated, “Holy places can be wherever you are—alone, in a crowd, with strangers, with friends.” Or, as Elder Holland put it: We love and cherish our dedicated temples and the essential, exalting ordinances that are performed there. . . . They are truly the holiest, most sacred structures in the kingdom of God, to which we all ought to go as worthily and as often as possible. But . . . when you have to, you can have sacred, revelatory, profoundly instructive experience with the Lord in any situation you are in. Indeed, let me say that even a little stronger: You can have sacred, revelatory, profoundly instructive experience with the Lord in the most miserable experiences of your life—in the worst settings.13 Haunted places truly can become holy places. So what do we need to do to have the power to make such a change in the places in which we stand? The first thing is to recognize that we cannot do this alone. No matter how good we are, no matter how talented we are, no matter how influential we are, we do not have the ability to make such changes on our own. The sole source of such transformational power is God. If we are to make haunted places into holy places, we need to tap into His power. How do we do that? Let me suggest a simple two-step process: We must first align ourselves with Him, and then we need to bind ourselves to Him. It is that simple. If we align ourselves with God and then bind ourselves to Him, we will be endowed with power to transform prisons into temples, humble dwellings into celestial abodes, and places of despair into havens of hope. So how do we align ourselves with God? He has indicated that the best way to do that is to believe in and align ourselves with His Only Begotten Son. 14 We align ourselves with God by becoming true followers of the Lord Jesus Christ—by patterning our lives after His example. When we do that, we are changed in significant ways. As explained in the Church handbook: As we become true followers of Jesus Christ, we experience a mighty change of heart and “have no more disposition to do evil.” . . . As we live the gospel of Jesus Christ, we grow line upon line, becoming more like the Savior in loving and serving others.15 Let me suggest two simple practices that can help us come into more complete alignment with the Savior: daily scripture study and daily prayer. I know that these are not new suggestions. You have all heard them before, but I worry that in this regard we can—to use Alma’s words to his son Helaman—become “slothful because of the easiness of the way.”16 When I was called as a bishop of a young single adult ward many years ago, our stake president was a wise, loving, and very seasoned priesthood leader. He had been a bishop, a stake president, and a mission president. He had seen it all. At one of our early training meetings he urged us to encourage our ward members to engage in daily scripture study and daily prayers. He said, “I have yet to find anyone who is studying the scriptures and praying on a daily basis who has an ongoing serious problem with the Church and its commandments.” I must confess that the first thought that came to my mind—sparked perhaps by the skepticism that legal training seems to inculcate in people—was, “Surely that can’t be true. It is way too simple.” But I can assure you now, more than twenty-five years later, after having served as a bishop twice, as a stake president, and now as an Area Seventy, I have yet to find anyone who is studying the scriptures and praying on a daily basis who has an ongoing serious problem with the Church and its commandments. It really is that simple. The daily practice of serious study of the scriptures and sincere prayer keeps the Savior enough in our minds and the Spirit enough in our lives that we will either make the necessary corrections to stay in overall alignment with the Savior or we will stop studying and reading the scriptures and praying because it is too uncomfortable. This does not mean you won’t have challenges or questions. You will. But daily scripture study and daily prayer will keep you on the path—will keep you aligned with the Savior and our Father in Heaven—to such a degree that you will find, over time, you are a better person, one more able to not only stand in holy places but also make holy the places in which you stand. But alignment with God in the abstract sense is not, by itself, sufficient to generate the power to transform our lives and the places we inhabit. We must not only align ourselves with God—we must also bind ourselves to Him. We need to draw upon God’s power not only to meet the challenges we face but also to be transformed by them. And we do that by binding ourselves to Him. As Elder Holland explained, “Every experience can become a redemptive experience if we remain bonded to our Father in Heaven through that difficulty.”17 And how do we bind ourselves to God? Through covenants. As Sister Linda K. Burton once noted, “Making and keeping covenants means choosing to bind ourselves to our Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ.”18 Covenants are “sacred and enduring promise[s] between God and His children.” 19 In the words of Elder D. Todd Christofferson, “In these divine agreements, God binds Himself to sustain, sanctify, and exalt us in return for our commitment to serve Him and keep His commandments.”20 I think we sometimes underestimate the centrality of covenants in the gospel plan. It was only a few years ago I consciously recognized that the title of our scriptural collection of modern revelation focuses on covenants. We call those scriptures the Doctrine and Covenants. Maybe it would be more clear if we referred to it as the Doctrine and the Covenants, because those two things constitute the focus of revelation in this dispensation: the doctrine, meaning the principles of truth we need to understand, and the covenants, which lead us to employ and effectuate those truths in our lives. Covenants are so powerful because it is through covenants that God’s general promises are made operative in our individual lives. Elder Christofferson explained it this way: Our covenants supply strength—they produce the faith necessary to persevere and to do all things that are expedient in the Lord. . . . In the first place, the promised fruits of obedience become evident, which confirms our faith. Secondly, the Spirit communicates God’s pleasure, and we feel secure in His continued blessing and help. Thirdly, come what may, we can face life with hope and equanimity, knowing that we will succeed in the end because we have God’s promise to us individually, by name, and we know He cannot lie.21 My advice to you in this regard is the same as that given by the Lord to Emma Smith in section 25 of the Doctrine and Covenants: “Cleave unto the covenants which thou hast made.”22 Cleave does not mean to casually and lightly grasp. It means “to cling or hold fast to; to attach oneself.” 23 The word cleave derives from the Old Norse word klîfa, which means “to . . . climb by clinging.”24 That is a pretty good visual image of how we can increase our potential for good. We climb upward by clinging, by hanging on with all our might to the covenants we have made with God, secure in His promise that He will keep His end of the agreement if we keep ours. If we do align and bind ourselves with God, it will make a profound difference both to the quality of our lives and to the lives of others in ways we may not fully recognize. Let me illustrate by reference to the image of a lighthouse. All of us are familiar with lighthouses. They send out a beacon of light that can hopefully be seen in the worst weather. They mark the line where the sea ends and the land begins—a very important marker for those who are piloting boats in bad weather. Lighthouses are fixed and immovable. They are constant, and sailors can therefore rely on them. But lighthouses also have another role to play for those who are piloting boats in bad weather. In addition to marking the place where the sea ends and the land begins, lighthouses can, with the help of other lights, guide sailors through treacherous waters where there are reefs and other unseen barriers that might sink the ship. In such situations there is often only one safe passage to the harbor, and the only way the pilot knows the ship is in that passage is by maneuvering the ship so that the light at the top of the lighthouse aligns with the carefully placed light on the shore. Once the ship is in that position, it can proceed safely, as long as those lights—the one in the lighthouse and the one on the shore—are in alignment with each other. If they are out of alignment, the ship is off course, and there is considerable risk of a tragic shipwreck. In the October 2012 general conference, President Boyd K. Packer related an incident that explains this very well. On one occasion he was assigned to a stake conference in Western Samoa. As part of the conference the group had to travel from Savai’i to Mulifanua on Upolu Island. They had originally planned to go by plane, but weather conditions prevented that, so they set out on a forty-foot boat. What they did not know is that they were headed into the center of a ferocious tropical storm. After many hours they crossed the rough seas and arrived at the harbor at Mulifanua. President Packer explained what happened next: We arrived in the harbor at Mulifanua. There was one narrow passage we were to go through along the reef. A light on the hill above the beach and a second lower light marked the narrow passage. When a boat was maneuvered so that the two lights were one above the other, the boat would be lined up properly to pass through the dangerous rocks that lined the passage. But that night there was only one light. Two elders were waiting on the landing to meet us, but the crossing took much longer than usual. After watching for hours for signs of our boat, the elders tired and fell asleep, neglecting to turn on the second light, the lower light. As a result, the passage through the reef was not clear. The captain maneuvered the boat as best he could toward the one upper light on shore while a crewman held [a] flashlight over the bow, searching for rocks ahead. We could hear the breakers crashing over the reef. When we were close enough to see them with the flashlight, the captain frantically shouted reverse and backed away to try again to locate the passage. After many attempts, he knew it would be impossible to find the passage [without the second light]. All we could do was try to reach the harbor at Apia 40 miles (64 km) away. We were helpless against the ferocious power of the elements.25 The group eventually made their way to safety, but it was a harrowing experience. President Packer observed, “I do not know who had been waiting for us at the beach at Mulifanua. . . . But it is true that without that lower light, we all might have been lost.”26 Let me share a similar story: More than a hundred years ago, a well-known Protestant preacher, Dwight L. Moody, shared a story of a ship trying to enter the Cleveland harbor on a very stormy night. The ship’s captain could see the bright light of the Cleveland harbor lighthouse. However, the lower lights weren’t visible at all. The lower lights were the way that ships identified the centerline of the safe entry to a harbor. Because the lower lights were not burning that night, the ship missed the entrance to the harbor and crashed into rocks. Many lives were lost. At the end of his sermon, Moody said, “Brethren, the Master will take care of the great lighthouse; let us keep the lower lights burning.”27 One of the members of Moody’s congregation that day was a man named Philip Paul Bliss, a musician. Bliss was so inspired by the lesson in Moody’s sermon that he wrote a hymn, which in our hymnbook is entitled “Brightly Beams Our Father’s Mercy.” Many of you will be familiar with the hymn. All of you should be. With the image of the lighthouse and these experiences in mind, listen to the first verse of that hymn: Brightly beams our Father’s mercy From his lighthouse evermore, But to us he gives the keeping Of the lights along the shore. Let the lower lights be burning; Send a gleam across the wave. Some poor fainting, struggling seaman You may rescue, you may save.28 The lighthouse of God’s love for His children is ever present and never moving. Some people will see it and will be drawn to it, but they may not know how to get to it. They will be looking for someone—some lower light—to show them the safe passage to that light. Their feelings may be like those found in a letter President Monson received from a less-active member of the Church: “I know where the Church is, but sometimes I think I need someone else to show me the way, encourage me, take away my fear, and bear testimony to me.”29 There may be many around you in the places in which you stand who are in the same position. They want to do what is right, they want to have greater peace in their lives, and they want to come closer to God, but they are unsure of how to do it. Your example may provide the lower lights they need to see the safe passage. More may depend on your scripture study, prayer, and covenant keeping than just your well-being. Others may be affected by your doing these things as well. Let me close with an example of how one whose light was burning bright affected others and turned what was a haunted place, at least for one person, into a holy place. It comes from an article written by Rick Reilly, who in my opinion is one of the best sportswriters of our time. It was written in the fall of 2012. Because he writes so well, I will quote extensively from his version of the story: In the scrub-brush desert town of Queen Creek, Ariz., high school bullies were throwing trash at sophomore Chy Johnson. Calling her “stupid.” Pushing her in the halls. [Making it, I would say, a haunted place.] Chy’s brain works at only a third-grade level because of a genetic birth defect, but she knew enough to feel hate. “She’d come home every night at the start of the school year crying and upset,” says her mom, Liz Johnson. “That permanent smile she had, that gleam in her eye, that was all gone.” Her mom says she tried to talk to teachers and administrators and got nowhere. So she tried a whole new path—the starting quarterback of the undefeated football team. After all, senior Carson Jones had once escorted Chy to the Special Olympics. “Just keep your ear to the ground,” Liz wrote to Carson on his Facebook page. “Maybe get me some names?” But Carson Jones did something better than that. Instead of ratting other kids out, he decided to take one in—Chy. He started asking her to eat at the cool kids’ lunch table with him and his teammates. “I just thought that if they saw her with us every day, maybe they’d start treating her better,” Carson says. . . . It got better. Starting running back Tucker Workman made sure somebody was walking between classes with Chy. In classes, cornerback Colton Moore made sure she sat in the row right behind the team. Just step back a second. In some schools, it’s the football players doing the bullying. At Queen Creek, they’re stopping it. And not with fists—with straight-up love for a kid most teenage football players wouldn’t even notice, much less hang out with. . . . It’s working. “I was parking my car yesterday, and I saw a couple of the guys talking to her and being nice,” says offensive lineman Bryce Oakes. “I think it’s making a difference around here.” And the best thing is? The football players didn’t tell anybody. “I didn’t know about any of this until three weeks ago,” says Carson’s mom, Rondalee, who’s raising four boys and a daughter by herself. “He finally showed me an article they wrote here locally. I said, ‘Are you kidding me? Why didn’t you tell me this?’” All of a sudden, Chy started coming home as her bubbly self again. When her mom asked why she was so happy, she said, “I’m eating lunch with my boys!” . . . I get emailed stories like this a lot, but most of the time they don’t pan out. They turn out to be half true, or true for the first week but not the second. But when I walked into the Queen Creek High School cafeteria Tuesday, unannounced, there was 4-foot-high Chy with 11 senior football players, eating her lunch around the most packed lunch table you’ve ever seen, grinning like it was Christmas morning. . . . “I thank Carson every chance I see him,” says Chy’s mom. “He’s an amazing young man. He’s going to go far in life.” Nobody knows how far Chy Johnson will go in life. The life expectancy of those afflicted with her disease, microcephaly, is only 25–30 years. But her sophomore year, so far, has been unforgettable. [I might say it has been turned from a haunted place into a holy place.] . . . But what about next year, when Carson probably will be on his Mormon mission and all of Chy’s boys will have graduated? Not to worry. Carson has a little brother on the team, Curtis, who’s in Chy’s class. “Mom,” he announced at the dinner table the other night, “I got this.” Lucky girl.30 One person setting an example for others—who probably wanted to help but didn’t know how—and, all of a sudden, a haunted place became a holy place. If you make and keep sacred covenants, if you prepare yourself daily for spiritual experiences through scripture study and prayer, if you align and bind yourselves with God, a light will emanate from you. Others will be drawn to that light, which is just a reflection of God’s light, and they will be drawn to Him. As that happens, you will not only be able to stand in holy places but you will also make the places in which you stand holy for you and for others. I bear you my witness that God lives. He has a perfect plan for each one of us. He places us where we can help others. That plan includes the birth, Atonement, death, and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, who leads this work today. I bear you my witness of these elements of the plan and of the truths that have been restored through Joseph Smith, and I do so in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> Whatever the circumstances you find yourself in, know with assurance that you can succeed. You are more capable, more talented, and more faith-filled than you realize. More important, you are more loved by God than you realize. It is a joy to join with Peggy in welcoming you to another school year. You are a wonderful sight, and this campus takes on new energy as you arrive here. We are grateful for that. My message today focuses on one of the most oft-repeated and yet most oft-overlooked and ignored and maybe violated commandments. By my count this commandment is repeated seventy-six times in the scriptures.1 The commandment was the first thing spoken by the angels who announced Christ’s birth to the shepherds outside Bethlehem.2 It was also the first thing spoken by the angels who announced Christ’s Resurrection to the women at the empty tomb.3 The commandment was conveyed by the angels who informed Mary and Joseph about their roles in the Savior’s mortal ministry,4 and it was part of the message of the angel who appeared to Zacharias to reveal the upcoming birth of John the Baptist.5 The commandment is repeated in at least two of our LDS hymns.6 It is a commandment that is found so frequently in the scriptures that we may not recognize its profound importance, especially for the times in which we live and the stage of life in which you students find yourselves. The commandment is a simple two-word injunction: “fear not.” Some may question whether the directive to “fear not” is actually a commandment. True, it is not preceded by the familiar “thou shalt not,” and it was not written on stone tablets. But it is clearly an imperative repeated often enough by divinely authorized sources, including many times by the Savior Himself,7 that it certainly seems like a commandment. More important, like all commandments, adherence to this two-word injunction will make our mortal journey both more productive and more joyful. This is not a new topic. It has been preached over this pulpit8 as well as over the pulpit in the LDS Conference Center.9 But I believe it is one that is of particular relevance as we begin a new school year with all of its challenges in a world that seems increasingly full of fears. I firmly believe that if we increase our compliance with this important commandment, the coming year and the endless years that succeed it will be better. With that belief in mind, let me first explore the meaning of this sometimes misunderstood commandment and then describe four things we can do to increase our ability to comply with its principles. What Is Fear? To understand the commandment to fear not, we first have to understand what we mean by fear. What exactly are we supposed to avoid? According to one source, “fear is a feeling induced by perceived danger or threat that . . . ultimately [leads to] a change in behavior.”10 As this broad definition suggests, not all fear is bad. Were it not for this emotion, we would not flee from or avoid things that would actually harm us. The feeling that might arise when we hear the signature tail warning of a rattlesnake is one we should not ignore. It keeps us safe. Similarly, the scriptures indicate that we are to “fear the Lord.”11 Surely we should not avoid this kind of fear. As Elder David A. Bednar once explained, this “righteous fear” is much different from the fear we are commanded to avoid. Righteous fear is instead “a deep feeling of reverence, respect, and awe for the Lord Jesus Christ,” a feeling that induces “obedience to His commandments . . . and anticipation of the Final Judgment and justice at His hand.”12 This kind of “godly fear dispels mortal fears”13 and thus aids in our compliance with the commandment to fear not. So if fear of real danger and fear of God are not covered by this commandment, just what is it that we are commanded to avoid? The fear that the scriptural injunction directs us to suppress falls into the category of what some psychologists call “irrational fear” or “fear of the unknown,”14 a fear of future events that will not likely occur. Using the letters of the term itself, some refer to this as “False Evidence Appearing Real”—FEAR.15 It is this false-evidence-appearing-real type of fear that Satan seeks to induce in us and that the Lord commands us to avoid. It is a kind of fear that is debilitating, sometimes paralyzing, and almost always soul- and energy-sapping. For some, this kind of fear takes the form of thoughts that you are not good enough to succeed here at BYU; for others, it takes the form of thoughts that you do not belong here because you are different from those around you. For some, it is a fear that you will never find an eternal companion; for others, it is a fear that the future appears so ominous and dangerous that marriage and a family seem too risky. And, for far too many, this fear comes in the form of the false belief that you are not acceptable to God, that you are so flawed because of past mistakes or current inadequacies that you are beyond the reach of the refining and redeeming power of Jesus Christ. When any of these false thoughts appears to be real to you, when such satanic lies cause you to lose hope in the future and maybe even in the present, please remember that God has repeatedly commanded us to “fear not.” That commandment falls clearly within the ambit of Nephi’s well-known and eternally true observation that “the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them.”16 Four Things We Can Do With that in mind, let me suggest four things we can do in such trying times to comply with the commandment to fear not. First, recognize and remember that this kind of “fear comes not of God, but . . . from [Satan,] the adversary of truth and righteousness.”17 Indeed, as President Gordon B. Hinckley taught, “Fear is the antithesis [the complete opposite] of faith.”18 This is evident from the scriptures themselves. The scriptures define faith as “the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen,”19 “which are true.”20 Faith is a real manifestation of what is really true. The polar opposite of that would seem to be the lack of substance or evidence of things that are false—or false evidence appearing real: fear. We need to recognize that the feeling of despair and hopelessness that characterizes irrational fear is a tool of the adversary. Indeed, it is one of his primary tools. I am convinced that just as we have articles of faith, Satan and his minions must have articles of fear to aid them in their work. They might read something like this: “We believe that the first principles of despair and damnation are doubt God, doubt yourself, doubt others, and, most of all, be afraid—be very afraid of the future.”21 I am certain the adversary fully understands that fear and faith cannot coexist. If we fail to understand that truth, we are at a comparative disadvantage. On the other hand, if we remember that simple fact in the moments when we are gripped by irrational fear, we not only will be able to recognize the true source of what President Hinckley called the “gnawing, destructive element”22 of fear but also will understand the cure for those debilitating feelings. As President Russell M. Nelson has reminded us, “Faith is the antidote for fear.”23 If we want to decrease the amount of fear in our lives, we need to increase the amount of faith in our lives. But it is not faith in the abstract that is the antidote to such fear. It is, as the fourth article of faith makes clear, “faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.” If we want to decrease the amount of irrational fear in our lives, we need to increase our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. So when fear threatens to overwhelm us, we should focus less on those fears and more on increasing our faith in Him who admonishes us to “look unto [Him] in every thought; doubt not, fear not.”24 And how do we do that? By getting to know the Savior better. The more we know Christ, the more we will trust and love Him and the more faith we will have in Him. In that regard, I urge each of you as the new school year begins to spend time on a daily basis getting to know Him through daily scripture study and prayer. These simple acts of daily scripture study and prayer—especially with the intent to know the Savior better—will do more than almost anything else to strengthen your faith in Him, which, in turn, will decrease the amount of irrational fear in your life, no matter the particular cause of that fear. So set aside time on a daily basis—in the morning or in the evening—to strengthen your faith in Christ through daily scripture study and prayer. Second, we can increase the amount of faith and decrease the amount of fear in our lives by serving others more. As the Lectures on Faith indicate, faith is a “principle of action.”25 It grows and operates in our lives only when we are willing to exercise our agency in an active way. If we want to increase our faith in a way that dispels our fears, we need to act. And often the best way to act is to serve others. Irrational fear causes us to focus on ourselves—on our own inadequacies and on our own inability to control things. When we focus on others and what we can do to help them, fear fades. This is just one way in which, as the scriptures teach us, “perfect love casteth out all fear.”26 I learned this in a powerful way while serving as a missionary in Mexico. In the early part of my mission, I was hesitant to speak, both because I am by nature an introvert and because my Spanish was not very good. I greatly feared that I would be embarrassed. I was focused on myself. One day as I walked down the street, I suddenly had a feeling overcome me that I can only credit to the Holy Ghost: it was a clear feeling that all of the people I saw bustling about me that day were literally my brothers and sisters and that all of them were sons and daughters of my Heavenly Parents, who were also their Heavenly Parents. Without any conscious effort on my part, I felt overwhelming love for each person I saw. At that moment I felt a great desire to speak to them. I was anxious to share with them words that would help them see their divine destiny, even if the words were not in perfect Spanish. I suddenly found that I cared more about them and their well-being than about my potential embarrassment. My fear of being embarrassed disappeared and was replaced by an almost consuming love for those people. As I shifted my focus from me and my inadequacies to others and their needs, my fear was cast out by the love that I felt. Similarly, when you find yourself overcome by fear, I urge you to look for others who need your help. Focus on what you can do for them—on what they need. If you do this, I promise your fears will decrease because your love for God and His children will increase. And, as President Dieter F. Uchtdorf recently reminded us, perfect love is also a “divinely appointed antidote to fear.”27 Third, we can increase the amount of faith in our lives if we understand that, as Elder Neil L. Andersen once observed, “Faith is not only a feeling; it is a decision.”28 “Faith is a choice.”29 There will be repeated times during this semester and during the rest of your lives when you will have a choice whether to be governed by faith or by fear. I urge you to be quick to recognize when that is the choice you face, because it is not always immediately apparent. If you are more aware of the fact that you are making a choice between faith and fear, you will more often make the right choice. If you do not pause to recognize that fact, fear may overcome you without you even realizing it. Let me illustrate with an example. A number of years ago I had an assignment on campus that involved athletics. In that role I was invited to attend a banquet for the women student athletes at which Sister Sheri L. Dew was the speaker. Any of you who have heard Sister Dew speak would understand how excited I was to be invited. She is a gifted speaker and a wonderful gospel scholar. I very much looked forward to hearing from her. Unfortunately, at the last minute a conflict arose, and, much to my disappointment, I was not able to attend. As you can imagine, then, I was especially excited when I was invited to the exact same event the next year and learned that one of the speakers was again to be Sheri Dew. This time I was able to attend. I was particularly thrilled when Sister Dew started off her remarks by saying that she was going to begin by telling the same story she had told the year before—allowing me to catch up. I was pleasantly surprised, thinking maybe she was doing this just for my sake. However, she quickly made clear that while she was going to tell the same story she had told the previous year, this year she was telling it to make an entirely different point from the one she had made the year before. Sister Dew explained that she had begun her remarks the prior year by telling the women student athletes how thrilled she was to be invited to speak because she had long wanted to be a part of BYU athletics. She said something to this effect: You will remember that I told you that when I arrived at BYU, I felt like I was the most ill-prepared, socially awkward freshman who had ever set foot on this campus. I told you then that I was from a very small town in Kansas—a town much smaller than the student population of BYU—and I felt completely overwhelmed, wondering if I would ever fit in. But there was one thing I thought might provide an entry into the BYU community, and that was basketball. I had played basketball in high school in Kansas, and, quite frankly, I thought I was pretty good. So I decided I would try out for the women’s basketball team. I learned all I could about the team: who the coach was, who had left the team, who was returning, and when the tryouts were to be held. Sister Dew then said: You will recall that I told you last year how I summoned up all my courage and went to the appointed gym in the Richards Building where tryouts were to be held. Wanting to make sure I maximized my chances, I had arrived early. You will also remember how I told you that I opened the door to the gym with some confidence, and then I watched the girls who were playing there. I thought to myself, “Wow, they are really good.” You will remember how I told you that I closed the door and then spent the next three hours walking up and down the hallways of the Richards Building trying to muster up enough courage to go back for the tryouts but that I finally gave up and returned to my dorm room without making the effort to try out. I told you that story last year so that you would understand that I truly meant it when I told you that I was thrilled more than you knew that I had been asked to speak to the women student athletes at BYU and to be made an honorary member of that group. I wanted you to know that it really was the fulfillment of a lifelong dream. But I am telling you this same story this year for a much different purpose because of what happened immediately after I spoke last year. After I had spoken last year, Sister Elaine Michaelis came up to me. Now many of you here will know Sister Michaelis. She is one of the legendary figures in BYU athletics. She worked in the Athletics Department for more than forty years, serving as women’s athletics director for much of that time. She was such an impactful and ­successful ­women’s volleyball coach that the volleyball court in the Smith Fieldhouse is named for her. During her coaching career at BYU, Elaine Michaelis at one time or another coached every single women’s sport. Now, with that background, let me share what Sister Dew went on to say: Sister Michaelis had spoken after me last year, and she then engaged me in a conversation while we were still on the podium. Sister Michaelis asked me, “Sheri, is that story true?” “Of course it’s true,” I replied. Sister Michaelis then responded, “Do you know who the coach of the women’s basketball team was the year you were a freshman?” “Yes, I do,” I said. “It was you. I knew everything about the team that year.” Then Sister Michaelis said, “I should tell you something, Sheri. In all my many years of coaching and of all the teams that I coached, there was only one year and one team that did not have a full roster. It was the women’s basketball team that year. We were one player short.” Sister Dew then said, pretending to stab ­herself in the heart: It would not have hurt any more to be stabbed in the heart than to have heard those words. There was a place for me on that team. God had prepared a way for me to fit in and had given me inspiration as to what I should do, and I let my fears keep me from that blessing.30 Sister Dew’s life turned out okay—we don’t need to worry about her—and the women’s basketball team survived without her as well. But that is just evidence that God truly can make “all things [including our own mistakes] work together for [our] good”31 if we will love and trust Him. But He will also bless us in the interim—in the short run and in the long run—if our choices are directed by our faith in Him rather than by our fears about ourselves. Be alert to the times during which you must choose between fear and faith. Those times confront us more often than we usually recognize. Fourth, even if we recognize that faith is a choice and that we are facing that choice, we may doubt our ability to make that choice—­especially in pressure situations. Too many of us too often worry whether we are capable of choosing faith when it really counts. If that is a concern, I urge you to recognize that you already exercised incredible faith in Christ at a most critical juncture in your eternal journey. You are all familiar with the scene. We were gathered together in a Grand Council in which our Father in Heaven described His plan for us to become like Him. Critical to that plan was the role of a Savior—someone who would live His life and give His life in a perfect way, thereby allowing Him to perform an atoning sacrifice that would enable us to gain the experience we needed to have in this fallen world without being condemned by the inevitable mistakes we would make.32 But there was also another plan presented, one put forth by Lucifer. A war was waged between the adherents of these two plans. As recorded in the book of Revelation, we were on the winning side. It was not a physical war but rather a war of words, a war of concepts—a war in which faith was our main weapon. Listen to how we prevailed, as described in Revelation 12: And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon. . . . And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony.33 It was the strength of our testimonies in Christ that allowed us to overcome Satan. It was our faith in Jesus Christ. Think about it. At that time the blood of the Lamb had not yet been shed and the Atonement had not yet been performed. All we had was the promise of our Heavenly Father and Christ that Jesus would perform His role perfectly. It all rose or fell on that. And we had the choice of whether we would believe in that promise in those circumstances. All we had was our faith in Him. But in that critical time, we all chose to be governed by faith and not by fear. If we sometimes doubt whether we really believe and whether we can act on that belief when it most counts, we can be emboldened by the reassuring fact that we believed before—and we believed with such certainty that the forces of darkness were compelled to flee from our presence. In your moments of doubt, despair, and fear, when you wonder if you can choose faith, remember that you already made that choice once when faced with that same decision in the pre-earth life. As Elder Robert D. Hales once noted: The blessings we enjoy now are because we made the choice to follow the Savior before this life. To everyone hearing . . . these words, whoever you are and whatever your past may be, remember this: it is not too late to make that same choice again and follow Him.34 My dear brothers and sisters: fear not. Whatever the circumstances you find yourself in, know with assurance that you can succeed. You are more capable, more talented, and more faith-filled than you realize. More important, you are more loved by God than you realize. God lives. He is our Heavenly Father. He has placed you on earth at this time and in this place because He knows you can succeed and that you can help others succeed in this particular setting. May the heavens open to give you glimpses of that truth and that destiny is my prayer as we begin this new semester. I ask it in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> I hope that because of our efforts to create a community of belonging, we may one day say, "The campus of BYU, the mountains of BYU, the buildings of BYU, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer as their hearts were knit together in love." I join Peggy in welcoming you to this new semester. You are a wonderful sight. In my opening devotional two years ago, I spoke on the need for us to physically gather together in Provo. Citing the Prophet Joseph Smith’s observation that “compact society is absolutely necessary”1 to the educational enterprise, I boldly proclaimed, “There is something about physical proximity—about gathering in a compact society—that is essential to . . . the kind of education that is most important [to us].”2 Six months later, that message of gathering and proximity was suddenly replaced by a plea to scatter and socially distance. Talk about a statement that did not age well. Like so many other things, the desirability of physical proximity and compact society seemed to be radically altered by the coronavirus. Given the apparent limited shelf life of my ­message about the importance of physically gathering and the continued, unwelcome presence of the pandemic, some might think this devotional would present me with a good opportunity to confess my error and admit that COVID has permanently changed everything, including the desirability of gathering in a compact society. Instead, even though we are wearing masks—and even though I am still strongly urging each of you to get vaccinated if you haven’t done so already—I am unwilling to concede to the coronavirus. Indeed, today I am going to double down on the concept of gathering and proximity, believing that these are eternal principles that will remain applicable well beyond COVID and likely well beyond this mortal existence. While we need to temporarily adjust some features of our educational endeavor until the pandemic abates, it is, in my view, more important than ever that we be with one another during this educational ­process—that we be part of a community. “The Waning of Belonging” Sociologists and philosophers have long noted the human need to join with one another. More than two thousand years ago, Aristotle opined that man is by nature a social or “political animal”3—that we have a deep-seated, innate desire to live and associate with others and to form communities. Well before that, the Lord observed that “it is not good that . . . man [or woman] should be alone,”4 reflecting not just the importance of marriage but also the larger principle “that no one can flourish in isolation and that the quality of our relationships with others will ultimately determine our level of fulfillment and happiness in both this mortal existence and the life to come.”5 Thus, there is within each of us a natural desire to give up a part of ourselves to a larger collective, to be part of a community. At the same time, there is also within each of us a desire—a deep-seated need—to be individually unique, free to act for ourselves, and independent from external constraints or commitments. This is reflected in the gospel concept of agency: our ability to choose our own destiny without interference from others, consistent with eternal law.6 There is, at one level, inevitable tension between these two concepts. As political scientist Robert D. Putnam has written, “The relationship between the individual and the community is one of the timeless dualisms of social thought.”7 Humans seem to vacillate between wanting to belong and wanting to be left alone. The tension and interplay between these two concepts are illustrated in classic western movies, some of which portray “a lone cowboy [hero] riding into the sunset”8 as the iconic symbol of individualism, while others focus on settlers traveling in wagon trains, sustaining and protecting one another as members of interdependent communities.9 Are we in America cowboys or pioneers? Or maybe both? As Putnam observed, “The relative emphasis on the individual and the community in American culture has varied over . . . periods of time, a pendulum swinging irregularly from one pole to the other and back again.”10 This swinging is, in part, a reflection of the fact that, depending on their definition and composition, communities can lead to ends that are either desirable or deplorable. Overly narrow and distorted definitions of community can have devasting effects, as evidenced by the pain and suffering of Native Americans often overlooked in classic western movies. At the same time, inclusive communities can become powerful forces for improving the human condition. Martin Luther King Jr. used the concepts of a “beloved community”11 and shared morality as influential tools in his battle for equality, reminding White clergy that “we are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny.”12 Thus, how a community is defined and how it is situated are critical to both its success and its desirability. With that in mind, let me share with you my vision of the kind of community I hope we can create in this year and in coming years as we gather together in this compact society at BYU. I begin, as I often do, by reference to the Mission of Brigham Young University. As I believe most of you know, our ultimate mission “is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.”13 Our work is aligned with and is part of God’s work to exalt all His children,14 including all in this university community. We have a distinctive role to play in that process—an educational role. We are to “provide a period of intensive learning in a stimulating setting where a commitment to excellence is expected and the full realization of human potential is pursued.”15 In the community we hope to build, students will be stretched and challenged intellectually in ways that may not always be comfortable—but should always be faith filled—to help them realize their full potential as children of God. The mission of BYU notes that “to succeed in this mission the university must provide an environment enlightened by living prophets and sustained by those moral virtues which characterize the life and teachings of the Son of God.”16 In this educational community, we are blessed to be led and guided by prophets, seers, and revelators, who in turn lead us to the Savior and His ultimate example, which we aspire to follow. We must take full advantage of that blessing if we are to create the kind of community we seek. The rest of the BYU mission outlines the specific educational goals, which I commend to you, and then concludes with the stirring assertion that “the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission . . . will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University’s influence in a world we wish to improve.”17 At my inauguration in 2014, President Henry B. Eyring described the kind of educational community that could fulfill the charges set forth in the mission of BYU. He called it “a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters.”18 I later described it as “a community in which all members are truly engaged in an individual and collective effort to use all their minds and faith to learn as much as they can . . . as fast as they can, with the ultimate goal of sharing insights with others to improve their lives.”19 I hope we will all renew our efforts to create that kind of “vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters” that President Eyring described. But there is a more specific challenge that we currently face. We live in a time when the pendulum that Putnam described has swung decidedly in the direction of individualism and away from any notions of community. It is an era in which we are experiencing what Elder Bruce C. Hafen called “the waning of belonging.”20 Our sense of community has lessened, and our sense of loneliness and isolation has increased. Despite an increase in the number of people with whom we have contact through social media, our innate need to be deeply connected with others is increasingly unfulfilled. Moreover, those same social media tools increasingly direct us away from any personal contact with those who disagree with or are different from us. So our society becomes increasingly polarized and increasingly angry, and more and more people feel ­marginalized—even on this campus. Thus, there is now a need to focus more specifically on creating and enhancing another kind of ­community—a community of belonging in which all members realize the full blessings that come from gathering together in “a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters.” Creating a Community of Belonging Many of you know that at the BYU annual university conference two weeks ago, we introduced the BYU Statement on Belonging to help us address this need. The original impetus for the statement was the outstanding work of the Committee on Race, Equity, and Belonging, which was given the charge to help us root out racism on campus. However, as I stated at the annual university conference, the reach of the BYU Statement on Belonging and the accompanying BYU Office of Belonging extends beyond that important endeavor.21 I will not read each section of that statement, as I did at the annual university conference, but I would like to highlight and elaborate on a couple of key provisions. A copy of the full statement can be found on the BYU News website.22 The statement begins with two key principles that unite us. Any community must ultimately be defined most fundamentally by what its members have in common. If they don’t share anything in common, there can be no community. And on this topic at this university, the two points that most unite us may distinguish and differentiate us from many other universities. The BYU Statement on Belonging begins: “We are united by our common primary identity as children of God . . . and our commitment to the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.”23 In other words, we share a common understanding of who we really are and why we are really here on earth. That common understanding is more powerful than many may appreciate. On one occasion, President Russell M. Nelson was asked how to help those struggling with a particular prevalent sin. His response was, “Teach them their identity and their purpose.”24 Elder Tad R. Callister later observed that this is “an appropriate response to most of the challenges we face in life.”25 Our understanding of our relationship with God and of His plan for us enhances not only our confidence and self-worth but, more important, our ability and desire to love all with whom we come in contact as we recognize their infinite worth and potential. United by our understanding of those and other truths of the restored gospel, “we strive to create a community of belonging composed of students, faculty, and staff whose hearts are knit together in love.”26 Our goal is to create a community of belonging involving all members of our community. As I have already noted, a sense of belonging is important to all human beings. Quoting from a report from the Mayo Clinic, President M. Russell Ballard noted at the most recent general conference: “Having a sense of belonging is so important. . . . Nearly every aspect of our lives is organized around belonging to something.” This report adds, “We cannot separate the importance of a sense of belonging from our physical and mental health”—and, I would add, our spiritual health.27 The Mayo Clinic report that President Ballard cited went on to add: The social ties that accompany a sense of belonging are a protective factor helping manage stress. When we feel we have support and are not alone, we often cope more effectively with difficult times in our lives.28 The strength and support that exist in a community of belonging are characterized in a scripture cited in the Statement on Belonging: Mosiah 18:21. In that scripture, a community of belonging is one in which the members’ “hearts [are] knit together . . . in love.” The phrase “hearts knit together in love” is interesting and significant. The heart is used in scripture as “a symbol of [our] mind and will . . . and the figurative source of all emotions and feelings.”29 The heart represents the core of who we really are. In a community of belonging, a portion of this central existential self must be willingly sacrificed to the group in ways that enlarge both our individual and community abilities. Knitting is a process whereby fabric—usually yarn—is used to create a product that consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows. As each row is formed, each newly created loop is pulled through one or more loops from the prior row and placed on the . . . needle so that the loops from the prior row can be pulled off the other needle without unraveling.30 Thus, knitting involves multiple, reinforcing connections as the different loops are brought together to create one single product. Knitting is similar in some respects to weaving, which is also “a technique for producing a . . . fabric made from . . . yarn or thread.”31 But knitting is different from weaving in one significant way: “Because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern, a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions.”32 That is not true for most woven products, which typically “only stretch along the bias.”33 “Depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%. For this reason, knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer’s motions.”34 We will need that kind of flexibility in our efforts to create a community of belonging, because knitting hearts will stretch us in ways that will challenge and test each of us. We often find ourselves exasperated when we realize we are working with less-than-perfect beings, but we too often forget that so are those who are working with us. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell put it, “We are each other’s clinical material.”35 That is both a sacred trust and a challenging test that requires and develops patience and love. But even as we are flexible and patient with others, we must remain anchored to the transcendent truths of God’s eternal plan. As anyone who has knitted knows, “if they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled.”36 Like any knitted product, if our hearts are not secured to God and His truths and commandments, the entire knitting project may quickly and completely unravel. Let me suggest three things we can do to secure the knitting that has already occurred and also accelerate the pace of the knitting that remains to be done to create a community of belonging in which hearts are united in love. First, let us strive to view others first as children of God. Our initial inclination as fallen individuals is to view those in front of us primarily by their gender, race, political affiliation, sexual orientation, economic class, or other distinguishing features. Those identities can be important from time to time, but all of them are secondary all the time. Our failure to constantly remember that is the cause of many unnecessary wounds and tears in the knitted product. We would do well to keep in mind the profound observation of C. S. Lewis, who once stated: It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. . . . It is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit.37 If we were to view those with whom we disagree through this lens, it would not only elevate the tone of the discussion but would also improve the quality of decisions that are made. More important, it would change the overall environment and soften hearts in ways that would make them more suitable for knitting. Second, we should think more in terms of the “we” and less in terms of the “I.” Usage of these pronouns can be very telling. As Putnam explained: Use of “we” is more common in strong marriages and close-knit teams. . . . Similarly, high-status, confident people, focused on the task at hand, not on themselves, use fewer “I” words.38 One of many factors that Putnam used as evidence that the pendulum has shifted away from communitarianism to individualism is the growing use of the first-person singular pronoun I relative to the use of the first-person plural pronoun we. Using Google’s n-gram search engine, which measures the number of times a word has appeared in the historical Google Books archive over time, Putnam found that “from 1900 to 1965 the word ‘I’ appeared less and less often in American publications, but after 1965 . . . that trend reversed itself.”39 Usage “of the word ‘I’ in all American books actually doubled between 1965 and 2008.”40 Because we are immersed in that kind of individualized cultural environment, it will take conscious effort to create a sense of community that focuses not just on ourselves but also on others. If we strive to think more in terms of “we” and less in terms of “I,” we might more often take into account how our words and actions impact not only us but also those around us. We might profitably ask ourselves more often, “Does this action really contribute to the creation of a belonging community, or does it simply create more divisiveness?” The answers to that question will not always be easy. But consideration of that inquiry will help create a belonging environment in which all feel welcomed and loved. The apostle Paul provided an example of how consideration of the impact on others might positively alter the decisions we make each day. In 1 Corinthians 8, Paul addressed the question of whether the Saints could eat meat that had been sacrificed to idols. He noted that since “we know that an idol is nothing in the world,”41 it really didn’t matter whether one ate the meat or not. Because those to whom he was writing understood that eating the meat did not necessarily indicate support for idol worship, Paul concluded that they could eat the meat without causing any harm at all to themselves. He wrote, “Neither, if we eat, are we the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse.”42 However, Paul indicated that, for him, there was another factor to consider. He worried that his actions might negatively affect those who did not have the same understanding about idols and that, seeing him eat the meat, they might think that idol worship was proper. And for Paul, the potential impact of his actions on others dictated his personal choice. Conceding that he could eat without harm to himself, Paul nevertheless refrained, stating, “If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth.”43 Our ability to create a true community of belonging with our hearts knit together would be greatly enhanced if we were to similarly consider the impact of our words and actions on the lives of others who we might unwittingly lead astray because they lack the same knowledge and context that we possess. Third, and above all else, we must trust God. Because knitting hearts requires molding into one the individual wills and hearts of each member of a community, it requires abilities beyond those of the most skilled human surgeon. In the end, it is a task that only God can perform. Knitting our hearts together requires that we trust Him completely with the one thing that is uniquely ours: our will.44 That kind of supreme sacrifice requires supreme trust in Him. And because the process is individualized and involves other people, the immediate results may not be what we expected. Indeed, at times they may seem counter to the end we are seeking. In such situations, which seem increasingly frequent in the swirling circumstances in which we find ourselves, we must allow God to work in His way and on His timetable. I heard a story this week that illustrates this well. It concerns a visiting pastor who attended a breakfast in the middle of a rural farming area. The group had asked an older farmer, decked out in bib overalls, to say grace for the morning breakfast. “Lord,” the farmer began the prayer, “I hate buttermilk.” The visiting pastor opened one eye to glance at the farmer and wondered where this was going. The farmer then loudly proclaimed, “Lord, I hate lard.” Now the pastor was growing concerned. Without missing a beat, the farmer continued, “And Lord, you know I don’t much care for raw white flour.” The pastor once again opened an eye to glance around the room and saw that he wasn’t the only one feeling uncomfortable. Then the farmer added, “But Lord, when you mix them all together and bake them, I do love warm, fresh biscuits. So, Lord, when things come up that we don’t like, when we don’t understand what You’re saying to us, help us to just relax and wait until You are done mixing. It will probably be even better than biscuits.” He then said amen. When we find ourselves frustrated by events, by actions of others, or even by our own actions, let us remember that if we trust God and His goodness, things will work out in the end—even if the individual ingredients are not initially very appealing to us. The followers of Alma whose hearts were knit together in love came to that blessed state when they were gathered together in a compact, proximate society in a land called Mormon. Their experience there caused them to revere that place. As recorded in Mosiah, “The waters of Mormon, the forest of Mormon, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer.”45 I hope that because of our efforts to create a community of belonging, we may one day say, “The campus of BYU, the mountains of BYU, and the buildings of BYU, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer as their hearts were knit together in love.” May this be our goal and destiny is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> The development of empathetic thinking and feeling that a legal education can promote may contribute to the development of our ability to love as the Savior loves and to truly possess charity, a central and essential celestial attribute. What a pleasure it is to be with you this evening. It feels like I am back home. While I value all of our programs at the university, I will openly confess that the Law School holds a special place in my heart. It is a place that has greatly shaped my life, both as a student and as a faculty member. The Mission of BYU Those who have followed my tenure as president know that my focus from the outset has been on the mission statement of the university, a foundational document approved by the BYU Board of Trustees in 1981. It sets forth the key principles that guide the university. Many of you will be familiar with the first sentence of the mission statement, which indicates that, in its broadest sense, our mission as a university “is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.”1 We are to provide what President Spencer W. Kimball called an “education for eternity,”2 an education that, in the language of The Aims of a BYU Education, is “(1) spiritually strengthening, (2) intellectually enlarging, and (3) character building, leading to (4) lifelong learning and service.”3 A quick review of the mission statement makes two things very clear: First, our primary focus is on teaching ­students. That may seem obvious. You may think that every university focuses on teaching students; that is why they exist. That is true. But at many universities the size of BYU, the focus on teaching students is counterbalanced against an emphasis on faculty research, with students sometimes relegated to coequal or even secondary status in some decisions. While research is an important part of what happens at BYU, various features of the mission statement remind us that students must remain the central priority. For example, the word students appears in the mission statement seven times. The word faculty appears twice. The word administrators appears only once. Although I am quite confident that the authors of the mission statement did not engage in a careful word count to ensure that the relative importance of each group was precisely represented in the numeric ratio, the relative use of each term serves as a reminder that our mission focuses on the ­students—and not on the faculty or anyone else. Second, consistent with the emphasis on students, the vast majority of the mission statement focuses primarily on undergraduates and what they should learn. The description of the type of education students are to receive is geared primarily to undergraduates. According to the mission statement, students are to receive a broad general education with in-depth learning and instruction in a selected major field.4 In other words, they are to receive a traditional liberal arts and sciences undergraduate education. Our enrollment numbers reflect that same undergraduate focus. We have approximately 33,000 full-time students, of which 30,000 are undergraduates; only 3,000 are graduate students. At many major universities the balance is much closer to 50/50 or in some cases is even weighted more heavily in favor of graduate students. Thus the mission statement makes clear that BYU is primarily an undergraduate teaching institution, not a graduate research institution. The only reference to graduate programs in the mission statement is in a single phrase indicating that research should be encouraged among both faculty and students, “including those in selected graduate programs of real consequence.”5 Given that undergraduate emphasis, one might ask, What is the role of the Law School in fulfilling the mission of BYU? This is a question I first began to ask myself when, as dean of the Law School, I realized that I was the only dean on campus who had absolutely no undergraduates in my college—not necessarily a comfortable position at a university whose primary focus is on undergraduates. So as I sat in Deans Council, I began to ask myself, How does a purely graduate program like the Law School fit in a place like BYU? This evening I would like to offer some thoughts on that question. What can—and should—be the role of a law school at a university like BYU, whose clear focus is on undergraduate learning? Or, to use the terminology of the mission statement, what does it mean to be a graduate program “of real consequence” at BYU, and does the Law School fit that definition? Law Schools in America’s History The question of how a law school should fit into the larger university is one that has been debated for much of America’s history. Although the early European universities included law as one of the central subjects to be studied,6 at the time of the American Revolution most lawyers entered the profession via an apprenticeship.7 Legal education was simply not a feature of most universities at the time.8 That trend continued through the nineteenth century as well. Most lawyers in the 1800s began the practice of law without ever attending law school. They became lawyers the way Abraham Lincoln did, by reading the law part-time. Today’s first-year law students may contemplate with envy the scene described by one of Lincoln’s friends: the future lawyer-president learned his craft by sitting under an oak tree reading law books day after day, moving around the tree to keep in the shade.9 That sure beats sitting in a sterile classroom, waiting fearfully to hear the sound of your name called by professors who seem to expect you to already know what you thought they would teach you. By the end of the nineteenth century there were law programs at a number of universities. Still, an 1891 report found that only one in five lawyers admitted that year had been to law school, and no state required law school attendance as a condition of admission to the bar.10 Moreover, even where there were law schools there were serious questions about whether they belonged in a university. Many academics in other fields viewed legal education as vocational training, an endeavor they considered beneath the dignity of institutions dedicated to the lofty ideals of a liberal arts education. The second-class status of early law programs within their universities was demonstrated by the fact that, in 1901, “opponents of Georgetown’s athletics program were irritated to discover [that] a disproportionate number of Georgetown’s athletes [were] enrolled in the law school.”11 In the eyes of many, law school courses were the “underwater basket-weaving classes” of their time. The relatively low esteem in which law schools were held is furthered illustrated by the fact that no one thought it odd that future Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black was not accepted into the college of arts and sciences at the University of Alabama in 1904 but was admitted without difficulty to that university’s school of law that same year.12 Summarizing the views of many academics at the time, Thorstein Veblen asserted in 1918 that “the law school belongs in the modern university no more than a school of fencing or dancing.”13 This thinking slowly changed as legal education moved toward a graduate school model. At the beginning of World War I, only two law schools—at Harvard and the University of Pennsylvania—required undergraduate degrees as a condition of admission.14 Others began to impose that requirement but essentially provided open enrollment to anyone with a college degree, often failing out a large number of students after admission.15 Yale led the way toward selectivity by limiting its class size to 100 students in 1926 and, in 1928, becoming the first school to require an aptitude test in addition to a college degree.16 Over time law schools became more selective and more academic, and as a result they began to gain greater stature within the university system. Today most universities with law schools proudly point to them as examples of excellence within the university. I think few, if any, quibble about whether law schools belong at a university. One reason the debate ended is that, over time, law schools became profit centers for their universities. Because the faculty-student ratio in law school is so much higher than that of most graduate programs and because legal research does not require expensive labs or equipment, law schools cost much less per student than most graduate programs, and they typically produce excess revenues that they share with the university. It is easy to welcome as a member of the university a program that regularly generates revenue for the university. By that monetary measure, law schools have generally been “of real consequence” to their universities for quite some time. However, the recent dramatic decline in law school applications may alter the way universities think about their law schools. As enrollments, and therefore revenues, decrease, some universities now find themselves in the position of subsidizing their law schools. My guess is that the term “of real consequence” may be used in quite a different way in conversations between those law schools and universities today. The Law School’s Role at BYU Fortunately, because of BYU’s unique funding model—under which basic funding is provided by our sponsoring Church—tuition does not provide the major source of funds for either the Law School or the university. As a result, the Law School’s role at the university has never been defined in financial terms. At BYU we must look for some nonmonetary definition of what it means to be a graduate program of real consequence. Key insights into what elements might be included in that definition at BYU come from a speech given by President Marion G. Romney at the dedication of the Law Building in 1975. President Romney was one of the prime movers in the establishment of the BYU Law School. Thus it was appropriate, and instructive, for him to explain, in his words, why he “used such influence as [he] had” to establish the Law School.17 President Romney gave several reasons, three of which I want to highlight tonight. First, he said, “I have long felt that no branch of learning is more important to an individual or to society than law.” Second, he said, “I further felt that the educational base at Brigham Young University—the flagship of our Church educational system—would be and should be broadened by the establishment of a law school.” Third, he said, “I likewise felt that the atmosphere of honor, integrity, patriotism, and benevolence prevailing at Brigham Young University would be a good influence upon a law school and its student body.”18 The latter two reasons seem particularly relevant to my topic because they directly address the relationship between the university and the Law School, so I will begin with those. But, as I will explain later, I believe that the first reason also sheds clarifying light on why we could consider this law school a graduate program “of real consequence” at BYU. With respect to the second and third reasons identified by President Romney, I note the focus on both the impact the Law School could have on the university and the impact the university could have on the Law School. President Romney seemed to envision a symbiotic relationship in which each entity would be helped by cooperating with the other. In the interest of time, I will not describe in much detail the things the university can do to enhance the Law School, but let me point out one thing by way of instruction and advice for the law students here. The language President Romney used to describe the positive impact the university would have on the Law School is interesting. He said it was “the atmosphere of honor, integrity, patriotism, and benevolence prevailing at Brigham Young University [that] would be a good influence upon a law school and its student body.”19 It is the atmosphere—the environment, not some specific university program or service—that would benefit the Law School and its student body. I don’t know exactly what President Romney had in mind, but when I think about the atmosphere that prevails among the undergraduates at BYU, I picture the thousands of eighteen- to twenty-year-olds in the freshman class I greeted just today. They are extremely optimistic, enthusiastic, and, yes, maybe a little naïve. But they radiate goodness and warmth. And I hope that their optimism and enthusiasm are a bit contagious. The study of law can breed cynicism and pessimism. And although you need to advance beyond the level of the somewhat clueless naïveté that afflicts some of the undergraduates on our campus, I hope you follow Elder Bruce C. Hafen’s important admonition to “view things not only with [your] eyes wide open but with [your] hearts wide open as well”20 and “to be as childlike as [your legal] education has taught [you] to be tough-minded.”21 If you find yourself becoming too jaded, too cynical, and too combative—or if others find you that way—I urge you to wander across the rest of campus or attend a student performance or a devotional and soak in the refreshing and rejuvenating atmosphere that these wonderful undergraduates help create on campus. Your life and the lives of your loved ones will be much better in law school if you do. Helping the University Accomplish Its Mission With that observation and invitation, let me now turn to the other part of President Romney’s vision: what the Law School can do to help the university accomplish its mission. As I noted, the primary focus of the university is on our undergraduate students. One might think that, as a solely graduate program, the Law School might have little or no impact on that portion of the student body. But that is not the case. In his most recent annual report to the university, Dean D. Gordon Smith outlined three ways in which the Law School directly enhances the educational experience of our undergraduates. First, in the past few years Law School faculty members have developed and taught undergraduate classes—such as Brigham Daniels’s course on environmental policies and Justin Collings’s course on the history and workings of the U.S. Supreme Court. Second, some Law School faculty have also responded to the university’s emphasis on undergraduate mentoring by involving undergraduates in their research projects. For example, this last year Dean Smith, David H. Moore, and D. Carolina Núñez employed thirteen BYU undergraduates in their Law and Corpus Linguistics Project. Another twenty-four undergraduates provided more than 1,300 hours of volunteer time on that project. Third, law faculty have also been increasingly involved in interdisciplinary work with other faculty members on campus. These collaborations are developing into faculty “clusters,” which lie somewhere between completely informal and ad hoc collaborations to more formal ongoing research and curriculum projects. Clusters have developed on such topics as law and entrepreneurship—with professors Curtis Anderson, Clark D. Asay, Stephanie P. Bair, A. Christine Hurt, and Matthew Jennejohn as well as Dean Smith joining faculty from the Marriott School of Management—and there is a cluster on opportunity and development in which David Moore, Carolina Núñez, and Michalyn Steele are working with faculty from Political Science and Sociology to address issues involving economic and other development in underserved areas. This outreach to undergraduates and undergraduate programs should never become the principal focus of the Law School. The Law School’s primary role is, and needs to remain, to provide an excellent legal education to our law students. But these examples demonstrate that the recent changes to the west entrance of the Law School are symbolic of a larger movement connecting the Law School to the rest of the university. The Law School has, over the years, also made a disproportionate contribution to university leadership. The thirty-six full-time faculty members at the Law School constitute less than 3 percent of the more than 1,400 full-time faculty members at the university. Yet three of the six BYU ­presidents—50 percent—who have served since the Law School opened its doors forty-three years ago have been Law School faculty members. In that same time period, law faculty members have also served in the university administration as provost, associate academic vice president (two of them), assistant to the president, and faculty athletic representatives to the NCAA (again, two of them). Numerous other faculty members have headed up important committees or other endeavors at the university. Kent D. Syverud, the president of Syracuse University and a former law dean at two other law schools, observed that this is because “law school . . . is genuinely a group of people who are problem solvers, and [they] can be deployed on problems across the university.”22 Dean James R. Rasband often described a law degree as a degree in leadership.23 While one may question the quality of the current university leadership, BYU provides ample evidence of the truth of that observation. The Law School has provided extraordinary leadership to the university and will continue to do so. The Law School also has a positive impact on the university in a number of other less direct but often equally important ways. To cite one example, one of the great challenges currently encountered by religiously affiliated universities, including BYU, is the dramatic increase in regulations that create pressure for those universities to abandon some of their religious norms in order to accommodate other values. In many cases a religious university’s ability to continue to pursue its own distinctive vision of education and life will ultimately depend on the extent to which religious liberty is recognized and enforced as an important legal and cultural norm in American society. The Law School again has a disproportionate role in helping the university in that regard. The work of the International Center for Law and Religion Studies has an enormous positive impact on the entire university in that respect, not only because of the influence it has on the development of legal norms throughout the world but also because of the relationships it creates with other scholars and religious liberty advocates, who often become key allies in matters directly affecting the university. Less obvious are the contributions made by the Law School itself in dealing with such sensitive issues. For a variety of reasons, the Law School is often the first unit in the university to face the challenges that arise when our religious values conflict with other norms. And the positive and productive way the Law School has handled those matters provides guidance to the university on how to work through such issues. In those endeavors the Law School has also built relationships of trust with external entities and developed expertise that the university can draw on when it faces those same issues. There is a good reason why former Law School dean James D. Gordon III heads up the accreditation efforts of the university. I daresay that no one on campus has thought as deeply about or had as much experience with such important and sensitive issues as has Jim. That expertise and experience alone would be of enough value to qualify the Law School as a program of real consequence for the university. There are other indirect benefits that the Law School provides to the university, some of which are even less obvious. As one example, let me return to President Romney’s observation about what impact he hoped the Law School would have on the university. The language President Romney used to describe that impact might be a bit surprising to those familiar with the nature of most graduate programs. He indicated that “the educational base” of the university “would be and should be broadened by the establishment of a law school.”24 If asked to describe the purpose of most graduate programs, few academics would use the word broaden. Deepen maybe—but not broaden. Most graduate programs require students to narrow their focus—to become more specialized—so they can study the narrower subject more in depth. There is some truth to the old saying that as one ascends the academic ladder from an associate’s degree to bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees, students learn more and more about less and less until they know everything about nothing. Yet President Romney chose the word broaden. He may have simply been indicating that by adding another program to the university, the university’s educational offerings would be expanded. But I suspect that President Romney, who was very careful in the language he used, intended to convey something more significant than that self-evident truth. I believe he was saying something about a distinctive and extremely valuable aspect of a graduate legal education. Dean Rasband articulately made a similar point in his remarks to entering law students, as recorded in the latest edition of the Clark Memorandum: If you consider the nature of most graduate education, its purpose is to narrow your field of vision and train you as an expert in a particular field, the classic example of which is a dissertation on a narrow subject on which no one else has written. The study of law, by contrast, is designed to broaden your field of vision and equip you with the tools to make judgments across the full range of human experience.25 Legal education is different from most other graduate programs. It is not a more focused study of topics already covered in the undergraduate years. It is a new way of approaching problems, a new way of thinking about matters, even a new, empathetic way of thinking and feeling about people. A graduate program that aims to broaden one’s horizons, to start anew after finishing college, contributes to the mission of the university by providing a living reaffirmation of BYU’s commitment to lifelong learning—learning not just in a particular topic but on every topic. And at BYU that kind of lifelong learning is especially important. In describing the broad general education we hope to provide our undergraduate students, the mission statement contains an important introductory phrase explaining the reason why a broad education is important to us. It reads, “Because the gospel encourages the pursuit of all truth, students at BYU should receive a broad university education.”26 We don’t provide a broad general education for our students just so they can be well versed enough to be interesting company at dinner parties and receptions. Our educational goals go well beyond that. We are helping prepare students for a postmortal life in which they can know all things. Having a graduate school that focuses on broadening rather than narrowing things provides a powerful reinforcement of that message. It makes clear that the broadening form of learning that is at the heart of our general education requirements should not, and does not, end with the receipt of a bachelor’s degree but extends into one of our most visible graduate programs and even beyond that. That more amorphous but potentially longer-lasting contribution of the Law School to the university’s mission underscores another significant role the Law School can play in helping the university achieve its main goal—the goal of assisting “individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.” Assisting in the Quest for Perfection and Eternal Life In the long run, our primary purpose as a ­university is to help our students acquire the knowledge, attributes, and character that will enable them to realize their full potential as “a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents” with “a divine nature and destiny.”27 We do not provide all they need to attain that lofty status. Ultimately, the full realization of that goal requires adherence to the key principles of the plan of salvation, including receiving saving ordinances, making and keeping sacred covenants, and adhering to the other commandments that God has given us. Most of all it is dependent on our accessing the enabling, sanctifying, and transforming powers that Christ makes available to us through His great atoning sacrifice. The university cannot accomplish those things, but I believe there is still a role for it to play in that celestializing process for all our students, including law students. We are to “provide a period of intensive learning,”28 not just in abstract principles of temporal knowledge but also in actual character and skill development. Earlier in my life I believe I had misconceived the full purpose of our mortal experience. In my undergraduate years I thought of life as a longer version of an academic course—“Earth 101,” if you will. The primary purpose of the course was to learn enough from life’s experience to pass the final exam. And once that happened—once we graduated to the next level of our existence—we could forget what we had learned in this life, just as I quickly forgot much of what I had learned while cramming for a test once the final was over. Over the years I have come to appreciate that God effectively and efficiently uses this mortal period of our existence not just to test our ability to survive in this fallen world with all its challenges but also to help us develop the skills and attributes that will enable us to realize our full potential in the next life—to develop what I have come to call celestial skills and attributes, those characteristics that celestial beings possess. Most of those characteristics are developed by adherence to the commandments with which we are all familiar. But I believe that God in His economy also provides us with opportunities to develop celestial skills in our day-to-day lives and that skills we might think are valuable only in helping us succeed in our temporal affairs are actually celestial skills that we will use in the next life. To use one example, I believe that the ability to counsel with councils is a skill set that will not only help us in our temporal affairs in this mortal existence but is one that we will continue to use—and will need to perfect—if we are to be exalted. I suggest that some of the skills we learn and develop in law school may be celestial skills. As I mentioned, the skill of lifelong learning is not just an aid in making ourselves interesting and interested through our retirement years. It is a celestial skill that we will need to acquire if we are to be like God. I don’t think Brigham Young was exaggerating when he said, “When shall we cease to learn? I will give you my opinion about it: never, never.”29 Brigham Young also observed, “We do not expect to cease learning while we live on earth; and when we pass through the veil, we expect still to continue to learn and increase our fund of information.”30 Lifelong learning, an attribute law school helps us develop, is—in my view—a celestial attribute. I think there are other celestial skills law school can help us develop. For example, it seems to me that the ability to frame and use questions—a skill widely practiced and modeled in law school—is a skill we may readily employ in the next life. Elder Marlin K. Jensen eloquently explained this in a Law School graduation speech a few years ago: The use of . . . interrogatories by a loving and wise Heavenly Father guides us. The technique enables him to raise relevant issues, to encourage our thoughtful analysis of them, and then to leave us to the exercise of our agency to act. It sounds almost lawyerlike; but I would prefer to describe the process as godlike.31 Similarly, legal education should enhance our ability to empathize with others, to see things from their vantage point, and to understand more fully how they think and feel. Those are skills that help lawyers in the practice of law, but they are also skills that have eternal significance. Let me share what I observed in a different setting: While the traditional study of law emphasizes the utilitarian importance of tolerating the views and differences of others, the laws of God require it as a manifestation of our love for God and His children.32 The development of empathetic thinking and feeling that a legal education can promote may contribute to the development of our ability to love as the Savior loves and to truly possess charity, a central and essential celestial attribute.33 My guess is that there are other celestial skills that this law school can help you develop. That may be one of the many meanings behind President Romney’s assertion that “no branch of learning is more important to an individual or to society than law.”34 If we follow President Romney’s challenge to learn the laws of man “in the light of the ‘laws of God,’”35 we might discover that there is more glorifying light in a legal education than we may have supposed. And so I end where I began, with the university mission statement. Let me suggest that, contrary to what I might have implied or expressed earlier, that document has more application to the Law School and the Law School experience than may appear at first glance. Even though graduate programs are not its main focus, the key components of the mission statement—especially our desire to “provide a period of intensive learning” to assist students “in their quest for perfection and eternal life”—are fully applicable to all BYU students, including—and maybe especially—BYU law students. In that, if in no other way, the Law School provides a graduate experience of real consequence. We may not know all the ways in which the Law School contributes to that mission, but I am confident that just as the Lord is “well pleased that there . . . be a school in Zion,”36 He is well pleased that there be a law school in that school. I firmly believe that in the process of time we will come to view with greater appreciation—and maybe even reverence—the role the Law School plays both in influencing a world we wish to improve and in preparing souls for the world to come. May it be so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> President Kevin J Worthen shares insights on how we should act despite outside influences. Welcome to our university conference. It is obvious that while the timing of this event and the subsequent commencement of classes next week follow a long-standing traditional pattern, much of the coming school year and even the format of this program will be quite different from what we have come to expect. Some of those differences are the result of preplanned improvements and some are the result of the coronavirus pandemic. To use the scriptural phrase in 2 Nephi 2, we have “both . . . act[ed] and . . . [been] acted upon”1 during this past year. And the result is that this year is much different from previous years. The dramatic nature of these differences, as well as their two major causes—acting and being acted upon—are illustrated by the two most distinctive features of the setting in which we find ourselves this morning. I am presenting from a platform different from the traditional stand and podium we have used for this meeting in the past. You are sitting—well, I don’t know exactly where you are sitting, but it is clearly not in the Marriott Center, where we usually gather. The first difference is a result of our acting: it is a preplanned innovation that we debuted on March 10, when Steven M. Sandberg presented his moving devotional on forgiveness.2 The latter change was introduced the very next week, on March 17, when Elder Jack N. Gerard gave an equally ­impressive devotional on trusting God3 to a completely empty Marriott Center because of concerns about the coronavirus pandemic—a clear example of being acted upon. In the intervening week between those two devotionals, the world changed dramatically for everyone in our campus community. In a period of only five days, we completely changed the mode of instruction for almost every class and rethought and reconfigured almost every service we offer on campus to make it safe for both our students and our employees to accomplish what they set out to do despite the devasting effects of the worst pandemic of our lifetime. Overcoming the Challenges Let me once again thank each of you for your part in what I can only describe as a miracle—an ongoing miracle that continues to this day as so many have worked so hard and so diligently to prepare for the return of our students to what is still a unique and precarious environment. Your monumental actions provide definitive proof that we can act even while being acted upon and that, because of Christ’s atoning power, in the long run the impact of our actions can overcome all things that act upon us.4 Because that is one lesson I hope you take away from my message today, let me repeat it: We can act even while being acted upon, and because of Christ’s atoning power, the impact of our actions can overcome all things that act upon us. Celebrate and Be Reenergized The changes that have occurred on campus over the last five months are so monumental that many of us mentally divide our prior year’s BYU experience into BC (Before COVID) and AC (After COVID), with March 12—the date on which we announced we would shift to remote ­instruction—as the dividing line. That is both understandable and natural. However, if we overly emphasize that divide, if we remember and judge this past year solely by the dramatic changes that occurred beginning March 12, we may deprive ourselves of the full blessings, joy, and progress that God intends us to derive from our experiences this past year. Let me give a couple of instructive examples. First, if we focus solely on how significantly things have changed since March 12, we may miss the opportunity to celebrate and be reenergized by the numerous accomplishments that occurred last year, many of which happened before March 12. Last year was an amazing year in that regard. Just to cite a few examples of our students’ successes, students from the Marriott School of Business took first place in at least five different competitions. [A picture was shown of the winners of the International Business Model Competition: Zoia Ali, Abby Warner, and Taimi Kennerley.] Students from the BYU animation program—which is a collaboration between the College of Fine Arts and Communications and the College of Physical and Mathematical Sciences—won their sixth Student Academy Award for their short Grendel. Students from the animation program also made history by winning first place in two categories at the Intel University Games. Their video game Avast Ye received first place for both best game play and best visual design, making them the first team to win two first-place prizes in the same year. Examples of achievements can be found in other aspects of the university operations. Construction on the new Westview Building commenced prior to March 12 and was completed after that date. It is now ready to be occupied. The last phase of our Heritage Halls living facilities has also been completed. And approval was given and construction has begun on a new music building. In athletics, the men’s cross-country team won the NCAA national championship, and the women’s cross-country team took second in their national championship event. The women’s ­soccer team advanced to the Elite Eight round of the NCAA tournament. At the end of the fall 2019 season, BYU was ranked fifth in the Learfield IMG Director’s Cup standings, which measure overall success among the more than 350 NCAA Division 1 programs. The men’s volleyball team finished its season ranked number one in the nation, and the men’s basketball team was ranked sixteenth in its final poll. In both cases their seasons were truncated by the pandemic. That rightly gives them and us cause for some lament. But please do not let us focus so much on what might have been that we miss out on the joy and strength that comes from celebrating what was—and is. In that regard, let me note that in a typical year, the stand at this conference is filled with recipients of various university awards. This year we are recognizing forty-seven individuals for their unique and outstanding service to the university. Each has demonstrated exceptional competency and sacrifice in their work. I honor each of them and express my personal appreciation to them. While we are unable to have them join us here in this meeting because of our circumstances, I hope you will take time to read about them in upcoming YNews articles and in the university ­conference awardee booklet that will be available online at the conference website. I urge each of you this week and in following weeks to take some time in your own departments and units to recognize the accomplishments of this past year—and don’t limit them to events in the After COVID era. Celebrate and recognize even the good things that were interrupted by the arrival of the coronavirus in Provo. The recognition that your God-given power to act produced good fruit before the pandemic can strengthen your faith that He will grant you the necessary power to act and overcome the challenges that will arise during and after the pandemic. Celebrating the past can help us remember that, because of Christ’s atoning power, the impact of our actions can overcome all things that act upon us. “Be Not Weary in Well-Doing” Second, too much focus on the Before COVID/After COVID divide may both unnecessarily ­discourage us and keep us from fully realizing our remarkable potential as a university. If we view the world solely through the Before COVID/After COVID lens, we may erroneously conclude that we have only two long-term choices. On the one hand, we could hunker down and weather the storm with the hope that when it is over, we can pick up the surviving artifacts of the pre–March 12 world and piece them back together in a way that will enable us to return to our prior unaltered plans—surviving, but otherwise unaffected by the pandemic experience. Alternatively, we could conclude that the pandemic is such a disruptive force that we should jettison all our prior plans and traditions and accept a new normal that is so radically different from our pre–March 12 days that what we did before is automatically suspect and in need of replacement. In short, overemphasizing the divide between the pre- and post-pandemic world may cause us to wrongfully believe that eventually we will have to either ignore the present, hoping it goes away quickly, or ignore the past, hoping it never returns. In my view, both those options are less than optimal. Fortunately, neither is inevitable. I believe that if we fully engage, process, and remember the experiences of this present pandemic world, we can bring together the past and the present to make a better future. I hope that we do not just survive this unusual experience but that we lean into it in a way that both reconfirms the essential components of our prior core goals and also accelerates our progress toward them. That is admittedly a very ambitious, audacious—and some would say unrealistic—aspiration. But I believe that we are better positioned than any other university to do this—that we were, if you will, built for this. The theme of this conference provides a key for how we can achieve this lofty goal. The theme comes from Doctrine and Covenants 64:33: “Be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work.” That verse contains both an admonition and a motivating reason for following that admonition. Both are especially relevant in the COVID world in which we currently find ourselves. The admonition is very simple: “Be not weary in well-doing.” That advice seems tailored specifically to the situation in which we find ourselves. It is so easy to become weary in this very uncertain COVID world in which everything seems to be dynamic and fluid and in which projections change overnight. The term “COVID fatigue” has now entered our lexicon. It is used to describe a number of different phenomena,5 and several different causes of the varying conditions have been identified. But surely one of the principal components of COVID fatigue is the seemingly ubiquitous uncertainty that surrounds almost every decision we are currently dealing with.6 It is difficult—and incredibly draining—to work in an environment in which you do not know if the plans you are so carefully creating will be effective or even possible. And it is still more enervating to repeatedly see that your work is undone by unexpected developments, sometimes even before the task is started. We are—and have been—operating in what cognitive psychologist Robin M. Hogarth calls a “wicked” learning and decision-making environment,7 one in which there are no obvious patterns and, as described by David Epstein, “feedback is often delayed, inaccurate, or both.”8 It is easier to work in what Hogarth calls a “kind environment,”9 in which, Epstein said, “patterns repeat over and over, and feedback is extremely accurate and usually very rapid.”10 That definition of a kind decision-making environment may describe much of what we did day-to-day before March 12, but it is clearly not what most of us have been dealing with since. It is hard to operate in a wicked environment because, as Hogarth has pointed out, there is so much uncertainty and misinformation that reliance on one’s prior experience often leads to exactly the wrong conclusion with disastrous results.11 Operating in that type of environment for long can be exhausting—unless one has both a higher vision and a higher, more accurate source of feedback. And this is where the second part of our scriptural theme comes into play. The Lord’s admonition that we “be not weary in well-doing” is accompanied by a statement that is both an explanation for why we should not be weary and a motivation for avoiding that mindset. We should not—and need not—be weary because we “are laying the foundation of a great work.” We are engaged in an endeavor that is of enormous import. And it is a work that is not ours alone but also God’s. If we truly believe that, as our mission statement declares, our task “is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life,”12 we should proceed with full confidence that our work is not only essential but God directed and God supported. That understanding will provide the most compelling motivation for not becoming weary in well-doing. We can be assured that, notwithstanding our current circumstances, God will give us the knowledge and ability to act in ways that will overcome all the effects of being acted upon. Aligning Ourselves with the University Mission Some might suggest that given the significant nature of the changes that have occurred, we should dramatically revise or even abandon our mission statement to adapt to the “new normal.” I believe that would be a serious mistake. We are—and have been for our entire history—engaged in a work that is enduring, even ever­lasting. We are laying a foundation for the eternities, not erecting a tent for temporary shelter. The first objective is to “ensure alignment with the university mission.”The second is to “enhance the educational experience of our students,” knowing that the shape of that educational experience is outlined in the mission statement and in the aims.The third is to expand enrollment—to make this mission-aligned, enhanced education available to more students. With that in mind, let me briefly review at a high level the things we have been working on in the past few years—and that we will continue to work on in the next few years, notwithstanding the pandemic. These come from the strategic five-year plan that we have developed as a President’s Council. There are three main strategic objectives. Each is grounded in specific provisions of the ­mission statement and aims of a BYU education: There are several more layers of details associated with each of these three strategic objectives. Let me share just the next level so that you can see in a bit more detail what I believe we should continue to focus on even as we adjust to and emerge from the pandemic. There are four major aspects of the effort to align ourselves with the university mission: First, we want to ensure that all our hiring processes focus not just on the secular skills required but also, and more important, on mission fit. Second and third, we need to ensure that our teaching and learning is “faith-based” and our research and scholarship is “student-centered.” I have attempted to describe what those two terms mean in prior university conference addresses that I believe are still relevant.13 Fourth, we want to promote a sense of belonging among all members of the campus community. In that regard, let me thank and acknowledge both the members of our university Committee on Race, Equity, and Belonging and those involved in similar efforts in the various colleges and other units on campus. Both gospel principles and our mission statement commit us to developing “a loving, genuine concern for the welfare”14 of all of God’s children, regardless of their race, gender, sexual orientation, or other distinguishing feature, each of which is secondary to our common identity as “beloved spirit son[s] or daughter[s] of heavenly parents.”15 For our second strategic objective, in order to enhance the educational experience of our students, we will continue to focus on inspiring learning, on expanding and enhancing experiential learning opportunities, and on improving classroom instruction. We will also continue working to improve access to limited enrollment programs and to develop BYU Online classes. To achieve our third strategic objective, we will continue to work on our plan to offer our enhanced educational experience to more students by expanding enrollment by up to 3,000 more full-time students over a six-year period. I should report that it appears we may have started out at a more accelerated rate than we had intended this year because of the early entry of a number of missionaries whose service was interrupted by the pandemic. But, as with most things, we will be able to make the necessary adjustments while continuing to stay on course. We will have a chance to discuss both our progress and our plans in each of these areas more in depth in the coming months. But I think it is helpful that we clearly communicate at the start of this academic year our intention to continue to focus on our pre–March 12 priorities. What was important before that date remains important today. However, as I stated earlier, that does not mean that our plan is to batten down the hatches and wait out the storm, hoping to emerge unaffected. This COVID experience, like all our mortal experiences, can and should help us improve.16 If we emerge from the pandemic unscathed but unchanged, we will have missed out on the full benefit of this unique experience. Making Our Classroom Experiences Come Alive Let me give just a few quick concrete examples of ways in which our ability to achieve our pre–March 12 goals may be enhanced by the pandemic experience we are going through. You will recall that one of the ways we have been working to enhance the educational experience of our students is through the continued development of BYU Online. As many of you know, BYU Online courses are designed not to provide online degrees or programs to those who can never come to our campus but rather to enhance the education of our on-campus matriculated students by helping them become lifelong online learners and providing them with increased scheduling flexibility. It also frees up classroom space to help with our expanded ­enrollment plans. We first began the BYU Online program as a pilot eight years ago, relying primarily on college and department volunteers. After seven years we had reached the point last fall semester in which we offered 101 courses with 249 sections, which resulted in just more than 11,000 enrollments. Following the sudden change to remote delivery on March 12, there has been increased interest in quality online options among colleges and departments as they have seen the ways in which student learning can be enhanced by online courses designed at the outset for that kind of experience. As a result, this coming fall semester we are offering 136 BYU Online courses with 415 sections, resulting in more than 26,000 enrollments in BYU Online courses. As you will see, that represents a 35 percent increase in the number of courses, a 67 percent increase in sections offered, and a 130 percent increase in the number of enrollments in the past pandemic year. I seriously doubt our BYU Online offerings would be nearly as robust in either number or quality without the pandemic. This does not mean that we will move to a system in which online learning becomes the exclusive or even primary means of instruction or that we will abandon other modes of instruction that are equally important to “the balanced development of the total person”17 to which our mission statement commits us. But this aspect of our efforts to enhance the learning experience of our students has clearly been accelerated by our post–March 12 experience. I believe that experience will also improve our in-person classroom teaching, which is a key component to the faith-based teaching and learning we hope occurs here. As a result of the involuntary shift to remote instruction, I believe most faculty will be more adept and more comfortable in using technology to enhance learning even in the in-person classroom setting. I believe many already—and more will in the future—think more deeply about how they present material in a classroom setting. If all we do in a classroom is deliver a pre-scripted lecture, we must now surely ask ourselves if we need to meet in person or if there is something else that could be done in what we now realize is extremely precious and limited face-to-face classroom time. The pandemic experience should make us more willing and able to try new things and to connect more effectively with our students in ways that enhance and deepen their understanding of the subjects we are teaching. Let me provide an example of an effort that was going on before last winter semester, before the pandemic, that illustrates the kind of creativity I hope our post–March 12 experience causes us to consider more frequently. [The video “Restoration Class Projects Inspire Creativity, Build Faith”18 was shown.] Now our current circumstances prohibit us from gathering together in that kind of crowded environment you saw in the video, but I am convinced that if we think carefully and receive inspiration, we will be enlightened as to ways in which we can make our classroom experience come alive as we think again about how we use that very ­precious time. Adapting and Moving Forward with Faith I also believe that our pandemic experience can help us reach our goal to promote a greater sense of belonging among all members of our campus community. I hope the physical and geographical separation that the pandemic has forced upon us will give us greater appreciation of the benefits we can all derive from our relationships with others, especially those whose backgrounds are different from our own. If we reflect on the loneliness almost all of us have felt at times these past five months because of physical separation, I hope we will all be quicker to look for and reach out to those who experience that loneliness even when they are surrounded by people. I also hope that the less frequent interaction we have experienced since March 12 will cause us to be more kind, more patient, and less quick to judge; that it will focus us more on others rather than on ourselves; and that we will be more committed to demonstrating, in the words of our mission statement, “a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor,”19 even in doing things as small and simple as wearing a face mask in public buildings and other places in which the safety of others might be compromised. Finally, this pandemic has provided us with a remarkable opportunity to increase our ability to deal with uncertainty. As I noted before, the pandemic may present the most “wicked” learning and decision-making environment that most of us have experienced in our lifetimes. However, I am confident it will not be the last time we encounter such a situation. Many—including one of our forum speakers next winter semester, David Epstein20—have concluded, even before the pandemic, that we are living in “a rapidly changing, wicked world.”21 The ability to adapt and move forward in such settings is increasingly important in today’s society. And we can provide opportunities for our students to learn this skill in a wide variety of settings. A good illustration of this is in the following video, which shows how photography professor Paul Adams helped students learn how to adapt to new ideas using an old technology, which was for them fraught with all kinds of uncertainty. [The video “Vanishing Voices Inspire BYU Photography Project”22 was shown.] Making a tintype image is a process that is very unforgiving and exacting. You have to get the mixture right in terms of coating the plate. You have to keep people still for a long period of time, and if there is a flaw, it comes out. It is there forever. It is sort of a wicked environment for these students. And the mixture of the chemicals themselves is flammable. The students involved in this project not only learned how to produce tintype images—which, as the video showed, led directly to one graduate’s current job—but they also developed the critical skill of dealing with the uncertainty inherent in using what for them was an entirely new and foreign method of photography, a skill that will serve them well regardless of the occupation they choose or the photographic equipment they will use. More important, as Elder Bruce C. Hafen has noted, learning how to deal with uncertainty and especially learning how “to understand and live with competing true principles [are] essential skill[s]”23 in our eternal development. One of the purposes of this mortal existence is to learn to proceed with faith even in the face of great uncertainty when there is no guarantee—other than God’s word—that things will work out for our good. If we can learn to deal with such uncertainty and “ambiguities with a believing attitude,” Elder Hafen said, “our faithful choices will lead ultimately to our sanctification.”24 Thus, learning how to deal with the unexpected and unpredictable—such as a coronavirus pandemic—will not only prepare our students to “be capable of meeting personal challenge and change,”25 as a portion of our mission statement provides, but it can also help them achieve “the full realization of human potential”26 that another portion of that statement requires us to do. Our challenge, therefore, is not just to survive the pandemic but to learn from it by acting with faith, even in the face of uncertainty, and trusting that God can truly make “all things . . . work together for [our] good,”27 as He has said. We have a legacy in this Church of meeting such challenges. Let me share one simple example from our history. From the earliest days of his arrival in the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young focused on building a temple. It was one of his primary goals. After years of work, progress began to be made, but then other events—events that no doubt caused the Saints to feel acted upon—came into play. Our former colleague Richard O. Cowan described one of those events this way: On July 24, 1857, as the Latter-day Saints were celebrating the tenth anniversary of their entrance into Salt Lake Valley, they received the . . . disturbing news that a potentially hostile United States army was approaching Utah. Not knowing the army’s intentions, Brigham Young had the temple foundation covered with dirt as a precaution. When the army arrived the following year, Temple Square looked like a freshly plowed field, and there was no visible evidence of the temple’s construction. As it turned out, the army marched through Salt Lake City without harming any property and set up its camp some thirty miles to the southwest, near Utah Lake. Even during the years when the army was in Utah, draftsmen in the architect’s office were busy planning the exact size and shape for each of the thousands of stones that would be needed for the temple. With the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861, the army was needed elsewhere, and it departed from Utah by December of that year. The foundation was uncovered in preparation for work that would resume the following spring.28 Now at this point the Saints had survived their version of a pandemic. But they did it while continuing to focus on their temple-building ­“mission” by doing the work the best they could under the circumstances. Once the threat was gone, they returned to the task with eagerness. However, something was different. Professor Cowan continued: At this time, President Young examined the newly uncovered foundation and became aware that it was defective. He and his associates noticed large cracks and concluded that its small stones held together with mortar could not carry the massive weight of the temple. On January 1, 1862, he announced that the inadequate foundation would be removed and replaced by one made entirely of granite. The footings would be sixteen feet thick. “I want to see the Temple built in a manner that it will endure through the Millennium,” [Brigham Young] later declared.29 Now I am certain that Johnston’s Army was not a welcome sight to the Saints in 1857. They may have viewed it as a threat not unlike a pandemic. Their first instinct was just to survive. But they resisted that and continued to work on their prior plans as best they could. And when the danger was gone, they found new insights that allowed them to build an even better and longer-lasting temple. Would they have discovered the cracks in the foundation if their work had not been interrupted by the army? I do not know. But I do know that they emerged from a crisis with a better foundation because they did not abandon the project. They learned that they could act even while being acted upon and that because of Christ’s atoning power, the impact of their actions could overcome all things that acted upon them. Although I have focused primarily on the traditional educational processes led by our outstanding faculty in the examples I have provided, there is a role for everyone and every unit to play in this process, including our academic support units. And their role is not limited to providing indispensable support to the academic colleges and departments. As amazing as those support efforts have been in the past five months—and they have been magnificent—the efforts of our academic support units in the central part of educating our students in a variety of ways have been equally impressive. The results may not be as widely known, but for some of our students, they are as eternally significant. Let me highlight just one of many examples. This example shows what has happened with a student employee in BYU Publications and Graphics. [The video “Inspiring Learning: Brent Standley”30 was shown.] What a great example of inspiring learning—not in a classroom, not in a course, but through employment in an academic support unit. That is what we hope can happen everywhere on campus before, during, and after the pandemic. I thank and love each of you for what you contribute to our mission, especially in these trying times. I do not think any university community has worked harder, more diligently, or more cooperatively than has ours to allow our students to gather in a safe way to learn in an atmosphere of faith the lessons of eternity that are available here. I should acknowledge that no matter how hard we have worked, things will not all go according to plan. We will have to adjust. It is possible that we will have to abruptly return to remote ­delivery—and maybe early in the semester. But we will continue to focus on the essentials outlined in our mission statement, confident that we are laying the foundation of a great work and that as we act righteously even as we are acted upon, we will, with God’s help, succeed because this is part of His work that will not fail. I witness that God lives. He has a perfect plan for His children—for each one of us. Because of the atoning sacrifice of His Son, Jesus Christ, Christ has the power to make all things right. And this is part of His work at this university. I so testify in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. © Brigham Young University. All rights reserved. If we choose to view events in our lives from the eternal perspective that emanates from an understanding of God’s eternal plan of salvation, our lives will be happier and more productive, and we will have greater strength to meet the challenges that will inevitably come our way. One of the most noticeable features of our ­valley is the Y on the mountain to our east. The Y’s expanse is so large and its presence so imposing that the mountain itself is named Y Mountain. The connection of the letter on the mountain to the history, purpose, and mission of the university is so deep and established that many refer to the university itself as simply “the Y”—a reference that continues to confound the alumni of Yale University. I hope that for today’s graduates, the Y on the mountain will serve as a reminder of the knowledge they have gained, the things they have done, and the persons they have become during their time at BYU. I also hope it will serve as an ongoing invitation to them to add to the impact of what some call the spirit of the Y—a spirit of service and character that emanates from not just the intellectual dexterity but also the spiritual strength that they have acquired here. The Letter Y That is a lot to expect from a simple letter of the alphabet, and especially one that struggled a bit to make it into and remain a part of our modern English alphabet. The letter y was introduced into the Roman alphabet—from which ours is derived—around AD 100,1 long after most letters had already arrived there.2 The letter y performed much the same role as the Roman letter i, which had made its way into the Roman alphabet 800 years earlier.3 The original function of the y was to allow the adaptation of Greek words into Roman writing.4 Thus it was called Y or I or E Greek—or i griega, for those who speak Spanish—as a reminder that it was not native to the Roman alphabet. Since it largely played a role already occupied by another letter of the alphabet, the letter y has always had a bit of a tenuous position. At least one modern linguist still decries the letter y as a “luxury . . . , or rather a great nuisance,” whose presence would not be missed and whose absence would simplify spelling rules.5 Why not, some ask, spell cycle, syllabus, and dynasty with an i instead of a y? But, despite its critics, the letter y has endured—sometimes only by means that seem serendipitous. At one time the Roman alphabet contained the letter thorn (þ). It was pronounced “th,” as in the words this, then, or the.6 While it performed a function quite different from that of the letter y, the lowercase thorn appeared similar to the lowercase y. “Over time, as Gothic script was introduced to Old English, ‘Y’ and ‘thorn’ looked too similar—and one had to go.”7 Unfortunately for the letter thorn, French printers did not have the letter thorn in their printing images in their presses, “and it became common to replace the ‘thorn’ with a ‘y.’”8 Thus signs in England began to read “Ye Old Fish and Chips Shop” and not “The Old Fish and Chips Shop,” and the letter thorn faded into obscurity. So, but for the peculiarities of French printers in the distant past, the mountain to our east might have looked like the letter thorn—and our university might have been known not as “the Y” but as “the Thorn.” The Y Left Standing by Itself The Y on the mountain has its own inauspicious origins. Its roots trace back to a rivalry between two classes of students only three years after Brigham Young Academy became a full-fledged university—a time when both Brigham Young University and Brigham Young High School shared the same space. It was not unusual in those days for a class to mark its graduation by leaving symbols on the landscape. In the spring of 1906, the junior class at the high school decided to get a jump on the process and at the same time demonstrate its superiority to the senior class by etching a large ’07 on the mountainside, referring to the year in which they would graduate in the future. Not surprisingly, upon awakening to that sight, the senior class objected. One contemporary account described the reaction with dramatic flair: The Student Body . . . sprang to its feet in angry ­amazement; the whites of its eyes gleamed like lightning. Its generals . . . ran to the four winds with flaming banners, and crying: “Assemble, ye hosts, prepared to fight!”9 There then ensued “an all-day mountainside altercation,”10 with punches exchanged on both sides. BYU president George H. Brimhall and BY High principal Edwin S. Hinckley assembled a group, and a decision was made to have all the classes join together to put the letters B, Y, and U on the mountainside.11 The project began with the letter Y to ensure that all the letters would be properly centered on the mountain.12 Measurements and calculations were made both on the mountain and at the old Academy Building (which is now the Provo City Library) to make sure the letter would appear centered and proportioned from the perspective of those in the valley. On an appointed day, the work began to construct the Y with lime, rock, and sand. As one participant described it: The students stood in a zig zag line about 8 feet apart stretching from the bottom of the hill to the site of the Y. The first [person] took the bag of lime, sand, or rocks and carried it 8 feet and handed it to the second [person]. The second carried it another 8 feet and handed [it] to the third [person], and thus the bag went up the hill.13 The group started in the early morning with the expectation that the job would be completed by 10 a.m.14 But the task proved much bigger than the group had thought. By midafternoon some students had fainted and had to be carried off the hill, and it was 4 p.m. before the Y was finally thinly covered.15 The effort was so exhausting that, in the words of one involved, “no attempt was made to cover the other two letters,”16 and the Y was left standing by itself. The Positive Spirit of the Y So one might say that the Y on the mountain is the result of fisticuffs and fatigue. Hardly the kind of motivational origins that one would choose to inspire the heart, notwithstanding the allure of the alliteration. And yet there is in that history, like the somewhat tenuous history of the letter y, two brief interrelated lessons that I offer as my advice to the graduating class today. First, symbols such as the letter y or the Y on Y Mountain ultimately gain meaning in our lives not so much because of their physical shape or presence but because of what we choose to make of them. Likewise, the meaning of events in our lives will be determined not so much by the events themselves but by how we choose to view and respond to them. And that in turn is shaped dramatically by the perspective from which we choose to view both the symbols and the events in our lives. Given its late arrival, its limited role, and at times even its tenuous place in the alphabet, some choose to view the letter y as a “nuisance,” but I, for one, delight in words such as yes, yearn, young, and even yikes—not to mention yawn, which many of you may be doing now. Similarly, given its origins, I suppose some could view the Y on the mountain as a symbol of conflict and exhaustion. However, I—and I believe most of us—choose to view it as a symbol of unity and energy, and that positive image has been reinforced by our actions over the years. If we choose to view events in our lives from the eternal perspective that emanates from an understanding of God’s eternal plan of salvation, our lives will be happier and more productive, and we will have greater strength to meet the challenges that will inevitably come our way. All that depends on how we choose to view things. Even with that more positive perspective, there will be times when you will feel overwhelmed by events—times when despite your best efforts you will fall short of your goal, when you will feel that you have utterly failed—just like the exhausted students must have felt when the B and the U were left off the mountain. But, as it turns out, having only a Y on the mountain may have been the optimum result, even though few, if any, might have thought so at the time. After all, as our own Peter B. Gardner observed in his BYU Magazine article a few years ago, “‘Lighting the BYU’ just doesn’t have the same ring to it”17 as does the phrase “lighting the Y.” And would we really prefer a “Bee-wy-yoomount Terrace”?18 The second lesson, therefore, is that in times when you feel like you have failed, that nothing is going right, and that there is nothing that can be done about it, you can—and I pray that you will—trust God’s remarkable promise that He can make all things work together for the good of those who love Him. I testify that this remarkable promise, found in Romans 8:28 and repeated throughout modern-day scripture,19 is true. You may not see it immediately, but God can make all things work together for your good. He can turn an altercation between rival classes and a failed attempt to stamp a mountain with three letters into a symbol of unity and success. More important, He can make good come from all our efforts—not just from our successes but also from our failures and the failures of others that cause us pain. God is that good and that powerful. We just need to trust Him. So as you look at the Y on the mountain, I hope you see hope, optimism, and faith in the future. I congratulate you graduates on your achievement and pray you will be uplifted by the positive spirit of the Y in all your endeavors. And I offer that prayer in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> I urge you to view things from an eternal perspective—in the light of God’s great plan of salvation. As you do so, your past, present, and future will be more meaningful, more fruitful, and more joyful. Graduation is a time for celebration. It is also a time for calibration. We therefore look backward and forward. We recognize and applaud the past accomplishments of the nearly 6,000 of you who will be awarded degrees this day. At the same time, we encourage you to consider the future and where you are headed. As you focus on both the things that have happened in the past and the choices you face in the future, it is important that you consider both from an eternal perspective and that you try to fit isolated events and decisions in your life into a broader, larger picture. The importance of doing so is suggested by a story from the book The Once and Future King by T. H. White. The book is about the legendary King Arthur of England. The first part of the book focuses on the education Arthur received as a young boy and, especially, the training he received from Merlin, the magician who helped prepare Arthur for his future kingship. Merlin used a variety of means to teach these lessons to Arthur. On one occasion, he told Arthur the story of Elijah and the rabbi: This rabbi . . . went on a journey with the prophet Elijah. They walked all day, and at nightfall they came to the humble cottage of a poor man, whose only treasure was a cow. The poor man ran out of his cottage, and his wife ran too, to welcome the strangers for the night and to offer them all the simple hospitality which they were able to give in straitened circumstances. Elijah and the Rabbi were entertained with plenty of the cow’s milk, sustained by home-made bread and butter, and they were put to sleep in the best bed while their kindly hosts lay down before the kitchen fire. But in the morning the poor man’s cow was dead. . . . They walked all the next day, and came that ­evening to the house of a very wealthy merchant, whose hospitality they craved. The merchant was cold and proud and rich, and all that he would do for the prophet and his companion was to lodge them in a cowshed and feed them on bread and water. In the morning, however, Elijah thanked him very much for what he had done, and sent for a mason to repair one of his walls, which happened to be falling down, as a return for his kindness. The Rabbi . . . , unable to keep silence any longer, begged the holy man to explain the meaning of his dealings with human beings. “In regard to the poor man who received us so hospitably,” replied the prophet, “it was decreed that his wife was to die that night, but in reward for his goodness God took the cow instead of the wife. I repaired the wall of the rich miser because a chest of gold was concealed near the place, and if the miser had repaired the wall himself he would have discovered the treasure. Say not therefore to the Lord: What doest thou? But say in thy heart: Must not the Lord of all the earth do right?”1 The point of the story is twofold: First, we can best judge things that have happened in our lives if we view them from God’s ­perspective, from an eternal viewpoint. When we have soul-stretching experiences, we should consider them in light of God’s plan for us, with the assurance that even though we don’t fully understand things when they happen, God can make “all things work together for [our] good” if we love Him.2 That should reassure us about both our past and our present. The more we understand His perspective and His plan for us, the more we realize that He is more mindful of us than we may be aware. Second, understanding the bigger picture can help us make better choices for our future. Looking beyond the immediate impact of our choices to the eternal perspective will help us have greater joy and satisfaction in life. Let me give you an example that may be particularly relevant to you graduates at this point in your life. There are a variety of paths you may pursue in the immediate future, ranging from graduate school to full-time parenting. But most of you will, at one point in your life, spend many of your waking hours at work. There are a wide variety of occupations that will be available to you for that phase of your life. You may be tempted to make a decision about which job you take based mainly on the income and prestige it will generate. This has some allure, but I urge you to consider a more eternal perspective in choosing what kind of work you do, and, even more important, I urge you to consider an eternal perspective in choosing how you do whatever work you choose. Professor Martin E. P. Seligman has noted that some scholars have identified “three kinds of ‘work orientation,’” or three ways of looking at your work: as “a job, a career, and a ­calling.”3 He explained that the differences among the three depend both on how well your work matches up with your skills and, more important, how you view the endeavor. A job, he observed, is something you do . . . for the paycheck at the end of the week. You do not seek other rewards from it. It is just a means to another end (like leisure, or supporting your family), and when the wage stops, you quit. 4 A career, however, entails a deeper personal involvement in work. You mark your achievements through money, but also through advancement. Each promotion brings you higher prestige and more power.5 Thus you will have more success and more enjoyment if you view your work as a career instead of just as a job. But even that orientation has its limits. Seligman suggested: When the promotions stop—when you “top out”—alienation starts, and you begin to look elsewhere for . . . meaning.6 The highest level of orientation, according to scholars, is what Seligman referred to as a calling or a vocation, which is a passionate commitment to work for its own sake. Individuals with a calling see their work as contributing to the greater good, to something larger than they are. . . . The work is fulfilling in its own right, without regard for money or for advancement. When the money stops and the promotions end, the work goes on.7 The work orientation you have depends more on how you view what you are doing than on what you are doing. As Amy Wrzesniewski put it: A physician who views the work as a job and is simply interested in making a good income does not have a calling, whereas a garbage collector who sees the work as making the world a cleaner, healthier place could have a calling.8 Make your work, whatever it may be, a ­calling or a vocation—not just a job. Finally, remember that as important as it is to view your work from an eternal perspective, it is even more important to understand that in the long run, your most important work is as a family member—as a wife and mother, husband and father, daughter and sister, son and brother. I recently heard a remarkably accomplished man tell about how decades after it had occurred, his children remembered very distinctly that he had missed an event important to them because he had to attend to some business matter. He noted that while his children could remember very well exactly what event he had missed, he had long since forgotten what seemingly more important business ­matter he had chosen to attend instead. President Harold B. Lee repeatedly taught: “The most important . . . work you will ever do will be within the walls of your own homes.” We must never forget that.9 As we celebrate your past accomplishments and look forward to your future, I urge you to view things from an eternal perspective—in the light of God’s great plan of salvation. As you do so, your past, present, and future will be more meaningful, more fruitful, and more joyful. May it be so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> Joy is the key to our spiritual survival in the trying times in which we live, as well as in the trying times that lie ahead of us. During this past October general conference, two members of the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder D. Todd Christofferson and Elder Neil L. Andersen, shared the exact same quote from a talk given by President Russell M. Nelson in the October 2016 general conference,1 when President Nelson was serving as president of the Quorum of the Twelve. Although it is always good to follow the counsel of prophets, seers, and revelators, I have learned to pay particular attention to those instances in which more than one of them focuses on the same topic—or, as in this case, the exact same words—at the same time. My desire to carefully reread President Nelson’s 2016 talk increased when I noted that Elder Dale G. Renlund also cited that same talk in his October 2019 general conference address.2 Clearly these brethren had been reading President Nelson’s October 2016 talk. Clearly, I thought, I should do the same. President Nelson opened his October 2016 talk by stating that he was going “to discuss a principle that is key to our spiritual survival.”3 I thought, “No wonder Elders Christofferson, Andersen, and Renlund referenced the talk.” President Nelson then upped the ante by adding, “It is a principle that will only become more important as the tragedies and travesties around us increase.”4 Now he had my full attention: “a principle that is key to our spiritual survival” and one “that will only become more important as” our challenges increase. What was that principle? President Nelson introduced the principle by reviewing the life of Lehi as recorded in the Book of Mormon. Lehi was persecuted, mocked, and even physically threatened because of his belief in God and his desire to keep God’s commandments. He left behind the comforts of home to go out into an unknown wilderness because of his commitment to God. He suffered hunger and other deprivations. Some of his sons rebelled against him. His was not an easy life. President Nelson summed up Lehi’s life in terms that may sound a bit like your life at times: “Clearly, Lehi knew opposition, anxiety, heartache, pain, disappointment, and sorrow.”5 President Nelson also noted that, in these trying circumstances, “Lehi taught a principle for spiritual survival”6 by declaring “boldly and without reservation a principle as revealed by the Lord: ‘Men are, that they might have joy.’”7 There it is. Joy is the key to our spiritual survival in the trying times in which we live, as well as in the trying times that lie ahead of us. When we experience “opposition, anxiety, heartache, pain, disappointment, and sorrow”—things all of us are likely to face in this coming year—how are we to survive? By tapping into the power of joy. Experiencing “a Fulness of Joy” I believe we often underestimate the importance of the concept of joy. Without much thought, we sometimes casually wish others a joyous holiday season or invite them to spread joy. But I am not sure we fully appreciate how central joy is to God’s plan for us. And it seems that our current leaders, from President Nelson on down, are now trying to draw our attention to it. In fact, according to a word search on the Gospel Library app, the word joy was used 149 times in this most recent general conference—more than double the sixty-five references in the April 2019 conference and nearly triple the fifty-four references in the October 2018 general conference. To use the current social-media parlance, joy was clearly trending in this last general conference. And the trend goes beyond general conference. The December 2019 issue of the Ensign and Liahona magazines focused on the concept of joy. Elder Patrick Kearon, a General Authority Seventy, quoted President Nelson’s talk on joy in his remarks at the First Presidency Christmas devotional just four weeks ago,8 as did Sister Jean B. Bingham in her recent BYU devotional talk here at the Marriott Center.9 Add to that Elder David A. Bednar’s BYU devotional last December,10 which focused on joy, and it is clear that joy is one of the principles that current Church leaders want us to consider more deeply. So my request for this coming year is that we focus more on joy; that we seek to understand it better; that we come to view it not just as a mental or emotional concept or feeling of comfort but as a principle of power—power to survive and thrive spiritually and otherwise; and that we come to experience what President Nelson has called “enduring joy.”11 So we begin by asking, “What is joy?” That is not a simple question. It is a question that philosophers, psychologists, songwriters, theologians, and poets have explored and debated for millennia. Part of the difficulty is that language is a little imprecise and ultimately inadequate to capture the concept fully. For example, some distinguish happiness from joy, although in scriptures and prophetic teachings those terms are sometimes used interchangeably. However, this much seems clear: joy is not merely a temporary emotion but rather a more permanent and constant condition. As stated in the Guide to the Scriptures, joy is “a condition of great happiness coming from righteous living.”12 It is not some momentary sensation of rejoicing but a condition—a state of being. King Benjamin described it this way: Consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness.13 President Dallin H. Oaks explained it this way: Joy is the ultimate sensation of well-being. It comes from being complete and in harmony with our Creator and his eternal laws. The opposite of joy is misery. Misery is more than unhappiness, sorrow, or suffering. Misery is the ultimate state of disharmony with God and his laws. Joy and misery are eternal emotions whose ultimate extent we are not likely to experience in mortality. In this life we have some mortal simulations, which we call happiness or pleasure and unhappiness or pain.14 Notice three common elements in King Benjamin’s and Elder Oaks’s descriptions: 1. In its fulness, joy is a condition or state of being; it is a constant. 2. It comes from living in harmony with God’s laws, from keeping His commandments. 3. We may not experience it fully in this life. Indeed, because of the limits of our mortal bodies and finite minds, we likely cannot even fully describe or understand this condition. As President Nelson noted, God “offers an intensity, depth, and breadth of joy that defy human logic or mortal comprehension.”15 In fact, the scriptures indicate that we can completely experience “a fulness of joy” only after resurrection, when our perfected bodies and spirits are “inseparably connected.”16 Thus joy is in one sense a description of our ultimate destiny. Joy is at the center of God’s plan for us. The book of Job recorded that when that plan was presented to us in the premortal existence, we “shouted for joy.”17 Note that the scripture indicates we shouted for joy and not with joy. It may well be that we were not just generally rejoicing at the announcement of the plan but rather were celebrating the concept of joy itself, shouting for joy, overwhelmed at the beauty and depth of the concept of joy and our realization that we, too, might enter into that state of being that our Heavenly Parents enjoyed. As Joseph Smith put it, joy or “happiness is the object and design of our existence.”18 Joy is the very purpose for which we, and everything else in the cosmos, were created. Thus it should be no surprise that it was the “good tidings of great joy”19 that the angel pronounced to the shepherds at Jesus’s birth. However, just because we may not completely experience a fulness of joy in this life, it does not mean that we are without joy in the world. Adam and Eve both recognized that their choices in the Garden of Eden made it possible that “in this life [we] shall have joy,” even “the joy of our redemption.”20 Indeed, one of the purposes of this life is to develop our capacity for joy—and the extent to which we do that will impact the degree to which we will experience joy both in this life and even more in the world to come. As Elder Jack H. Goaslind once observed, “Our joy in God’s kingdom will be a natural extension of the happiness we cultivate in this life.”21 Thus Moroni taught that our level of joy does not automatically change with death. When the Judgment comes, he wrote, “he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still.”22 Thus, even though we may not experience a complete fulness of joy until the next life, it is very much in our interest to do what we can to experience all the joy we can in this life—both because it will make our current lives better and because it will better prepare us for our ultimate destiny to experience the fulness of joy that God wants to share with us. So how do we do that? How can we cultivate more joy in our lives now and thereby increase our capacity to experience joy in the next life? Let me share six suggestions. Cultivating More Joy in Our Lives First, we need to recognize, and constantly remember, that our ability to have joy in this life—and in the eternities—is not dependent on external conditions. As President Nelson so eloquently put it: The joy we feel has little to do with the circumstances of our lives and everything to do with the focus of our lives. When the focus of our lives is on God’s plan of salvation . . . and Jesus Christ and His gospel, we can feel joy regardless of what is happening—or not happening—in our lives.23 This is the quote that Elders Christofferson and Andersen cited in their most recent general conference talks. This is the quote that Elder Kearon shared in the Christmas devotional and that Sister Bingham shared in her most recent BYU devotional. It is so contrary to what many in the world think—and that erroneous thinking diverts us from joy—that it bears repeating: The joy we feel has little to do with the circumstances of our lives and everything to do with the focus of our lives. When the focus of our lives is on God’s plan of salvation . . . and Jesus Christ and His gospel, we can feel joy regardless of what is happening—or not happening—in our lives. This is not a mere abstract concept. It is to be taken literally. President Nelson made this clear: For example, it doesn’t seem possible to feel joy when your child suffers with an incurable illness or when you lose your job or when your spouse betrays you. Yet that is precisely the joy the Savior offers. His joy is constant.24 This is what President Nelson invites us, as well as all the world, to experience—what he calls “enduring joy”—joy that can exist even when we fail a test, feel rejected, or face ridicule. It is a joy that does not need to wait until midterms, finals, or any other unpleasant task is over before we feel it. True joy, even the somewhat diluted but still overwhelming25 brand we can experience in this life, transcends our circumstances. So don’t wait for your circumstances to change before experiencing an increase of joy. Draw on the power of joy in every situation. Second, we should recognize and remember that enduring joy—constant joy—does not mean uninterrupted bliss and a life free of challenges. Suffering and adversity are part of the eternal plan, a part of the process by which we come to develop enduring joy. Joy helps us transcend temporary trials; it does not eliminate them from our lives. As Elder Lawrence E. Corbridge recently noted, “Suffering and joy are not incompatible but essential companions. You can suffer and never know joy, but you can’t have joy without suffering.”26 Even God, who is the very essence of joy, experiences sorrow. As recorded in Moses 7, God weeps over the wrong choices of His children and over their resulting, unnecessary sufferings.27 But, at the very same time, He comforts those who join in that sorrow by instructing them to “lift up your heart, and be glad,”28 because those who embrace His plan “shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy.”29 So don’t let Satan fool you into thinking that you are failing in your quest for joy because you have tough days. All of us do. Satan wants us to be miserable like unto him,30 and one way he strives to do that is by discouraging us into thinking that the challenges and difficulties we experience are the result of our own inadequacies and prove that we are not worthy of joy. But many of life’s events are beyond our control. We may struggle with mental health issues or be radically affected by the inadvertent, or even intentional, misdeeds of others, or maybe we just struggle because of the vicissitudes of life. If so, we should not blame ourselves or think ourselves beyond God’s reach. Instead we should recognize that with the Savior’s help, we can still experience joy—even in the midst of our afflictions. As President Nelson explained, because of Christ “we can feel joy even while having a bad day, a bad week, or even a bad year!”31 When you experience the inevitable challenges that lie ahead, believe in God and believe that He is concerned for you individually. He will weep with you, even as He bids you to “lift up your heart, and be glad.” And when you are struggling, do not overlook the positive impact that you can have on others even while you are feeling inadequate. You are probably doing much better than you think, and others around are uplifted even when you are struggling inwardly. I often meet with distinguished visitors to campus. Many of them are struck by the joy they feel radiating from the students on campus. They labor to describe what they feel as they mingle with students, and they search for words to explain why they feel it. One such visitor asked me if we had “a happiness initiative” on campus. I responded that we did not, that it was just the natural disposition of our students. I am sure that not every student this visitor met was having the best day ever; some, I am sure, were struggling. Yet they still radiated joy that uplifted this visitor—and many others. I realized later that I had missed a wonderful missionary opportunity. When I was asked if we had a happiness initiative, I should have said, “Yes. It is called the plan of happiness. Would you like to learn more about it?” Third, recognize and remember that true joy, enduring joy—the joy that many visitors to campus sense—ultimately comes only through keeping God’s commandments. Remember, King Benjamin indicated that joy describes “the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God.” Indeed, the commandments are the guidelines or the requirements for experiencing enduring joy.32 As Joseph Smith explained: Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God.33 It is only when we live in accordance with celestial law that we are able to experience celestial joy. As section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants makes clear, “For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory.”34 And one of those commandments is to love our neighbors35 and to demonstrate that love through serving them, whether it be through formal ministering assignments or just through simple deeds of kindness for a roommate or a stranger. Focusing on the well-being of others increases our joy, regardless of our external circumstances. As Elder Goaslind once observed, “One key to maintaining your happiness in spite of adversity” is to follow Christ’s commandment to lose our lives for the sake of others.36 It is concern for the well-being of others that gives God joy.37 It is in following Him and His example that we will experience that same fulness. President Nelson summed up the connection between joy and keeping the commandments with this very practical, but powerful, observation: Every time we nurture our spouse and guide our children, every time we forgive someone or ask for forgiveness, we can feel joy. Every day that you and I choose to live celestial laws, every day that we keep our covenants and help others to do the same, joy will be ours.38 Fourth, because we will not in our mortal state keep the commandments perfectly, repentance is a critical part of experiencing enduring joy. Many in the world, and too many in the Church, view repentance as an unpleasant, even dreaded process, confusing the consequences of failing to repent with repentance itself. However, as Elder Christofferson explained, just the opposite is true: When prophets come crying repentance, [some say] it “throws cold water on the party.” But in reality the prophetic call should be received with joy. . . . Repentance is a divine gift, and there should be a smile on our faces when we speak of it. . . . Rather than interrupting the celebration, the gift of repentance is the cause for true celebration.39 One stake president wisely observed that “if we really understood the doctrine of repentance, we would run to repent.”40 Reflecting this same understanding, one of my Church colleagues confided in me that one of his goals was to be in the Repentance Hall of Fame. This does not mean that repentance is easy or that it should be done casually. President Nelson has taught, “To repent from sin is not easy. But the prize is worth the price.”41 Repentance always stretches our souls, sometimes beyond what we think we can stand, as Alma the Younger discovered. But the joy Alma felt as a result was so great that, once he had experienced it, he “labored without ceasing, that [he] might bring [other] souls unto repentance; that [he] might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which [he] did taste.”42 So if we want to experience joy, we need to repent—and to even repent joyfully. Because, as President Nelson observed, “when we choose to repent, we choose to . . . receive joy—the joy of redemption.”43 Fifth, we need to recognize and remember that joy is a principle of power. Joy is not just a reward for a lifetime effort to follow God’s commandments and to repent when we fail. Joy can increase our ability to stay on the covenant path that leads to enduring joy, to do things we might not otherwise be able to accomplish. As President Nelson explained, “Joy is powerful, and focusing on joy brings God’s power into our lives.”44 As proof of this truth, President Nelson pointed to the example of the Savior, “‘who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross’ [Hebrews 12:2]. Think of that! In order for Him to endure the most excruciating experience ever endured on earth, our Savior focused on joy!”45 Similarly, we can bring God’s power into our lives by focusing on joy. President Nelson asked: If we focus on the joy that will come to us, or to those we love, what can we endure that presently seems overwhelming, painful, scary, unfair, or simply impossible? . . . . . . What repenting will then be possible? What weakness will become a strength? What chastening will become a blessing? What disappointments, even tragedies, will turn to our good? And what challenging service to the Lord will we be able to give?46 Sixth, and finally, all of this is possible only because of Jesus Christ. President Nelson summed it up: “How, then, can we claim . . . joy? We can start by ‘looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith’ ‘in every thought.’”47 Let me repeat again, with a little different emphasis, the quote that so many Church leaders have recently shared: The joy we feel has little to do with the circumstances of our lives and everything to do with the focus of our lives. When the focus of our lives is on God’s plan of salvation . . . and Jesus Christ and His gospel, we can feel joy regardless of what is happening—or not ­happening—in our lives. Joy comes from and because of Him. He is the source of all joy. . . . For Latter-day Saints, Jesus Christ is joy!48 Thus Christ is not only “the author and finisher of our faith” but is, in one sense, the author and finisher of our joy. We begin to have joy when we focus on Christ. We can then bring the power of Christ into our lives by focusing on joy. I bear witness that He lives and that because He lives, we can, in the world to come, experience the fulness of joy that is part of our eternal destiny, if we so choose. And in this life we can, through joy, survive and flourish spiritually. May we more fully experience the power of joy in the coming year is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> My admonition is that you be awful in its original, unpejorated sense—that you always be aware of things that are awe-inspiring. I am urging you to be full of awe, if you will. It is customary for speakers at a graduation ceremony to give advice to the new graduates, to share with them words of wisdom to inspire them in their next stage of life. Perhaps because such sage advice is in somewhat limited supply, much of what is said at these events has been said before and will likely be said again. With that in mind, let me give you graduates a two-part charge that I doubt you have heard in any graduation ceremony you have attended. First Charge: Be Awful The first part is a simple two-word admonition: “Be awful.” Yes, you heard right. My advice to you is be awful. You can see why I was so confident that you would not have heard this message at any prior graduations that you have attended.1 Before you dismiss my advice as a completely inappropriate effort to be unique rather than helpful, let me explain what I mean by that charge. Linguists know well that the meaning of words can change dramatically over time. One form of change is what is called pejoration. “Pejoration is the process by which a word [with a positive or neutral meaning] acquires negative connotations”2 over time. One classic example of pejoration is shown by the history of the word silly. In the ­thirteenth century the word silly meant ­“worthy, good,” and “pious, holy.”3 Over the ensuing centuries, however, the meaning changed first to “innocent” or “harmless,” then to “deserving of pity or sympathy,” to “weak/feeble,” then to “ignorant.” By the ­sixteenth century it had descended to “foolish,” its ­current meaning.4 The same thing has happened to the word awful. It too has pejorated. Centuries ago the word awful had a very positive connotation. Its original meaning was “awe-inspiring,” “worthy of . . . respect,” and “profoundly respectful or reverential.”5 But as one author explained, “Since what inspires awe isn’t always so pleasant, [over the centuries, awful] came to mean something negative.”6 The word had pejorated, linguists would say. And so today awful has come to mean “terrible, dreadful, appalling”; something not just bad but “exceedingly bad.”7 Hardly the kind of thing you would expect a graduation speaker to advise you to be. My admonition is that you be awful in its original, unpejorated sense—that you always be aware of things that are awe-inspiring. I am urging you to be full of awe, if you will. “Psychologists have described awe as the experience of encountering something so vast—in size, skill, beauty, intensity, etc.—that we struggle to comprehend it.”8 It is the kind of thing that Moses experienced when God showed him the purpose, creation, and history of this earth. Struggling to comprehend the grandeur of all he had seen, Moses “greatly marveled and wondered.”9 As a result, he came to realize things he “never had supposed.”10 He was in awe—or full of awe. Being awful in that way has its rewards. It makes life fuller, more enjoyable, and more productive. Matthew Hutson explained in a recent article in the Atlantic magazine that awe shrinks our ego. Awe makes [us] feel a greater sense of oneness with others. And this oneness can make us nicer: Researchers found, [for example], that inducing awe—[such as] by having people stand in a grove of tall trees—increased generosity. . . . Awe also shapes our sense of time. One series of studies found that awe made time feel more plentiful, which increased life satisfaction.11 Most important, experiencing awe can help us keep things in perspective. That is what happened to Moses. His vision caused him to think deeply about the grandeur of God and His plan of salvation. Moses understood things he had never even supposed before. That in turn caused Moses to have greater faith in God and in God’s plan for him. I am confident that all of you during your time here learned something that you never had supposed. It may have been an insight into a subject you were studying. It may have been the discovery of something you did not know about yourself. It may have been inspiration concerning the goodness of God and His love for you and for others around you. I hope that each of you took advantage of those opportunities to be filled with awe—to be awful. Moreover, I hope you continue to have such experiences for the rest of your life. Unfortunately, increased knowledge can sometimes diminish our ability to experience awe. President Dieter F. Uchtdorf put it this way: It seems to be human nature: as we become more familiar with something, even something miraculous and awe-inspiring, we lose our sense of awe and treat it as commonplace.12 Thus the first part of my charge is to not let your education diminish your willingness to experience awe, for there is so much in the world around us that can cause us to be full of awe. BYU professor David W. Hart stated it well in a devotional talk he gave here a couple of years ago. He said: Make an extra effort to find awe in the everyday aspects of your life and take a moment to say, “Wow!” In so doing, your senses will be heightened and, in turn, will reveal more about you as well as additional opportunities to apply your uniqueness.13 Second Charge: Don’t Pejorate; Ameliorate The second part of my two-part charge consists of a three-word admonition: “Don’t pejorate; ameliorate.” Just as words can pejorate and acquire a more negative meaning over time, words can also acquire a more positive meaning. Linguists call this amelioration. A classic example is the word nice, which in the twelfth century meant “careless, clumsy; weak; poor, needy,” but which through a series of changes over the centuries has ameliorated to mean “kind, thoughtful.”14 As each of you are now graduates from BYU, you will carry with you your good name and the good name of this university. What people think of those two names will largely depend on their interactions with you. The second part of my charge to you is that you never do anything to pejorate your name or the name of your alma mater, that you instead strive to ameliorate both. My hope is that those who encounter you and learn that you are a graduate of Brigham Young University will think better of BYU because they know you, that the term BYU will ameliorate—not pejorate—as a result of what you do and who you are. Moreover, most of us have also taken upon us the sacred name of Jesus Christ. Please do nothing to diminish the importance of that name, for “Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby [men and women] can be saved.”15 As we are filled with awe for Him and for His works, as we act in accordance with the promptings we feel at such times, His name will not only ameliorate but will eternally be glorified by what we do. I hope you make that one of your postgraduation goals as well. So be awful. Don’t pejorate; ­ameliorate. Words to live by. May we all do so is my humble prayer, which I express in the awe-inspiring, holy name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> You are a vital part of this gathering. You have something to gain from and something to offer in your interactions with those around you. Welcome to the first devotional of the new academic year, the first official gathering of the campus community—a campus community that is itself the result of a gathering of students, faculty, and staff from throughout the world to Provo. It is a wonderful sight—and a wonderful feeling to be with you. At this devotional gathering of those who have been gathered to Provo, I would like to talk about gathering. More than a decade before he became president of the Church, our beloved prophet Russell M. Nelson taught that the “doctrine of the gathering is one of the important teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.”1 And, as you well know, since he became president of the Church, President Nelson has emphasized that the gathering of scattered Israel is the greatest challenge, the greatest cause, and the greatest work on earth. . . . . . . There is nothing happening on this earth right now that is more important. . . . There is nothing of greater consequence. Absolutely nothing.2 President Nelson has invited all of us to enlist and involve ourselves in this great cause. The gathering envisioned by President Nelson is stunningly broad and at the same time remarkably focused. It is a gathering that is all-encompassing in its intended target. It involves “all of God’s children on both sides of the veil,”3 extending to not only the more than seven billion current inhabitants of the earth today but also the billions of others who have ever lived on the earth. At the same time, it is a gathering for a specific purpose—to invite all “to come unto their Savior, receive the blessings of the holy temple, have enduring joy, and qualify for eternal life.”4 I encourage all of you to accept President Nelson’s invitation to be involved in the missionary, temple, family history, and ministering aspects of that great work. However, today I would like to discuss how the doctrine of gathering applies to your educational endeavors on this campus this year. Gathering Is Essential to Education I start with the premise that the educational endeavor in which we are engaged is greatly enhanced by our gathering together in one particular place. This thought first came to me when I became the dean of the law school here at BYU. It was then that I began to understand the enormous resources the Church expends to bring us all together on this campus for the purpose of providing an educational experience to our students. As I considered the amount of funds that the Church provided to the law school—not only for operating expenses but for capital projects as well—I concluded that if all the Church wanted to accomplish was to ensure that 120 active, covenant-keeping Latter-day Saints could obtain a good legal education each year without incurring unnecessary debt, the Church might be better off financially to simply give a very generous stipend to each of those law students and send them off to other really good law schools. But that is not what Church leaders chose to do. Instead, at great expense, they built, staffed, and maintained a law school where these students could gather together. Reflecting on this decision, I determined that there must be something more that comes out of the BYU educational experience than the elimination of or reduction in the debt of law students who might as a result better bless the kingdom. As I now consider the budget of this university and the hundreds of millions of dollars the Church expends every year to make it possible, I have come to the same conclusion with respect to the entire university. There must be some reason other than providing an affordable education to 30,000 students that would cause Church leaders to expend all the time and all the expense of building a campus and managing its operations in order to bring people—specifically, you ­students—here. As I have begun to understand the doctrine of gathering, the why has become a little more clear. The concept of gathering goes back much further in time than many realize. It seems to have been part of the plan before the earth was even created. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world.5 It is not surprising then that even before Israel was scattered throughout the earth—indeed, even before there was a group of people called Israelites—Adam physically gathered his posterity together in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman.6 And one of the reasons he did so was to provide instruction to those whom he had physically gathered together.7 Thus, from the outset, education has been one of the main purposes of gathering. In fact, education of the most important type seems to require a physical gathering. Joseph Smith further taught: Intelligence is the great object of our holy religion. . . . Intelligence is the result of education, and education can only be obtained by living in compact society. . . . One of the principal objects then, of our coming together, is to obtain the advantages of education; and in order to do this, compact society is absolutely necessary.8 Joseph seemed to indicate that there is something about physical proximity—about gathering in a compact society—that is essential to education, at least to the kind of education that is most important. In today’s world, in which online education seemingly eliminates the need for people to be in one place at one time in order to hold a classroom discussion, one might wonder if the Prophet’s observation merely reflected the conditions of his day—whether his statement came with an expiration date, making it applicable only until technology developed to the point that the barriers of distance and time no longer limited the conveyance of information. That view might hold some sway if the sole purpose of education is to convey information. But at BYU, our educational charge is much broader than that. A BYU education does not focus solely on the acquisition of information, as important as that critical task is to the educational process. As our mission statement makes clear, a BYU education focuses more broadly on “the full realization of human potential.”9 And that potential is much greater than most people understand. Each of our students, indeed every human being, “is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.”10 Our ultimate educational goal is to assist them in their quest for that ultimate divine destiny. Our goal is to provide an education that is “(1) spiritually strengthening, (2) intellectually enlarging, and (3) character building, leading to (4) lifelong learning and service.”11 It is that kind of holistic education that I believe is greatly enhanced or made fully possible only by gathering together in one location. Here is the real question then: What is it about ­gathering here in Provo that is helpful—maybe even essential—to that kind of education? I will readily admit that I do not have all the answers to that question, but let me offer some thoughts, along with a few specific suggestions and invitations as you begin the new school year. My thoughts on this question first began to form some twenty years ago at a devotional address just like this given by President Gordon B. Hinckley here in the Marriott Center. As he began his address, President Hinckley noted that he had recently spoken at another university in this state at which most of those in attendance were institute students who, like BYU students, were clean, well groomed, eager, and attentive. Returning from that experience, he wondered, “What [does BYU] have . . . that for the most part is not found elsewhere?”12 He then discussed a number of things that distinguish BYU from other universities, several of which are features that advance the aims of a BYU education in ways that are enhanced by close interaction with others in a compact society—by being part of a gathering. He noted, for example, that we “have a unique and dedicated faculty” who “are, for the most part, dedicated Latter-day Saints, men and women who feel as much at home in the house of the Lord as they feel in the classrooms of this university.”13 This remarkable faculty—who are at the forefront of knowledge in their fields of expertise and also rock solid in their faith in and commitment to the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ—is truly unique. There are a number of universities in which you might encounter both a large number of faculty who are involved in cutting-edge research in their fields and a different set of very able institute faculty who can teach and model the principles of the restored gospel. However, only at BYU, here in Provo, will you find a gathering of a large number of faculty who embody both of those attributes in the same person. These are faculty who are at once involved in world-class research and committed to the principles of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. In making that observation, I include our outstanding faculty members who, while not members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, support and live in accordance with its principles. The gathering of such a faculty with whom you can interact—and from whom you can learn hour-by-hour, day-by-day—is an extraordinary blessing that can be found nowhere else. And to enhance the impact of that gathering of faculty, we ask these faculty members to engage you—the ­students—more proximately by involving you in their research endeavors. This provides you with a truly unique opportunity to come to know in a closer way what a life that is both spiritually strengthening and intellectually enlarging looks like. And because these faculty are all gathered on one campus—in a “compact society,” to use Joseph Smith’s term—you can get glimpses of what a community of disciple-scholars looks like in a wide variety of subjects, helping you understand the interrelationships between truths found in all disciplines. I invite you to get to know your faculty better and to take advantage of opportunities you have to work with them on a mentored-research project or even just to engage with them in informal discussions. I urge you to take advantage of your opportunity to interact with this extraordinary community of disciple-scholars who have been gathered here in this compact society for your benefit. President Hinckley also noted that BYU students belong to wards or stakes populated largely by other students. This again is possible only because you are gathered together in one place. However, like President Hinckley, I wonder “how many of you really appreciate the meaning of this”14 opportunity. As President Hinckley noted, membership in such a unit automatically gives you a place where you belong: “There is no competition to get into social fraternities, and yet there is every opportunity for sociality. Here every student stands on an equal footing.”15 No one is left out; no one is alone in the process. President Hinckley noted that membership in a ward carries with it a built-in support system with bishoprics, Relief Society presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, and ministering brothers and sisters, all available in close proximity to help you deal with the inevitable individual challenges you will face during your time here. What a blessing that is to your education. Membership in wards and stakes not only provides you with a support system that you will all need at one time or another, but it also gives you the opportunity to serve others—an important aspect of the kind of character development that is a critical part of your education. Membership in a ward that is geographically based rather than self-selected gives you the opportunity to interact with, serve, and, as a result, love those with whom you might not otherwise associate. It gives you the opportunity to operationalize the powerful covenant we made at baptism “to bear one another’s burdens, . . . mourn with those that mourn . . . , and comfort those that stand in need of comfort.”16 During your time at BYU, you will be given assignments and callings to serve and minister to those you would not otherwise know—or perhaps even care to know. What may start off as acts of duty have the potential to lift, elevate, and change you as you come to understand and then truly love all with whom you come in contact—even those whose views may differ greatly from your own. As Bryan A. Stevenson taught in a forum here last year, “There is power in proximity.”17 And membership in wards provides that proximity. As you come to truly know others—especially those who are neglected or on the margins—you can better help them. This will then help you develop the Christlike character to which the aims of a BYU education point. I invite each of you to be actively involved in your ward or stake and to look for other opportunities to serve those around you, both on and off campus. Others have been brought here and you have been brought here for that very purpose. It is one of the ways in which your being part of a gathering here will make your BYU education more productive. President Hinckley noted that another aspect of the distinctive BYU experience is the presence of a temple near the campus. Joseph Smith taught that the primary purpose of gathering throughout the ages is to build temples so God’s children can receive the ordinances and instruction needed to achieve their full potential.18 President Hinckley observed that the close proximity of a temple gives you, the students, the “opportunity to work unselfishly in the interest of others while growing spiritually yourselves,”19 again contributing directly to the aims of a BYU education. I invite you to take full advantage of that opportunity that is now available in two locations in Provo. It will refine and elevate your educational experience in important ways. Finally, President Hinckley noted that all students at BYU have agreed to live “the proscriptions and the prescriptions of the Word of Wisdom.”20 President Hinckley observed that in addition to helping students avoid the all-too-prevalent problems associated with alcohol on most college campuses, following the Word of Wisdom enables students to realize the scriptural promise that they would find “great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures.”21 He stated: This does not mean that you will necessarily be smarter in your normal studies. It does mean that the power of the Holy Ghost may distill upon you and bring to you an increased knowledge and understanding of the . . . things of the Lord. This is another phase of the BYU experience.22 The blessings of this individual commitment to live the Word of Wisdom can be reinforced and strengthened by being part of a community collectively committed to that promise. I invite you to encourage your fellow students to keep that promise, as well as the other honor code commitments they have made. The power of being part of a collective commitment to standards is another educational benefit that comes from being gathered into a compact society. President Hinckley summed up his expectations by stating, “I hope that the BYU experience will cause you to take on those qualities that will make of you a true disciple of Jesus.”23 That is the real goal of a BYU education. And that process is enhanced by gathering together. Elder Dale G. Renlund taught the faculty and staff just two weeks ago at our annual university conference: Developing Christlike attributes does not happen in a vacuum or by isolating ourselves. It does not happen by metaphorically cloistering ourselves in monasteries and chanting mantras. That is not the purpose of compact societies. Christlike attributes come to us as we serve God and our fellowman.24 There are undoubtedly other ways that your BYU education is enhanced by the fact that you have all been gathered here at this time and place. Physical attendance at these devotionals is one of them. On a weekly basis we can hear from inspired members of our own campus community and, with increasing frequency, from General Authorities and general officers of the Church, including members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles or the president of the Church. I invite and urge you to attend those devotionals in person. There is a different spirit that attends this unique kind of physical gathering, a spirit that can elevate and enhance the holistic education we hope you all experience at BYU. You Have Been Gathered in This Compact Society by God Let me close with a simple—but, for me, ­powerful—example of what can happen when students view themselves not just as isolated individuals pursuing their own individual career goals but as part of a covenant community gathered together in a compact society to realize their full potential as children of God. As many of you know, law school can be very competitive. At most law schools, including BYU’s, students are literally ranked in order by their grades, and employers often make the initial hiring decisions based primarily on that ranking. It is an environment rife with competition—which, as C. S. Lewis taught, is at the core of the sin of pride.25 To add to the tension, in most law-school courses the seemingly all-important grade is determined solely on the basis of the final examination. As you might imagine, the stress levels at the law schools are quite high during finals. A few years ago, after finals but before grades had come out—before students knew how they had done—I was involved in a discussion with a group of law students about how to avoid pride and animosity toward their fellow students in that kind of highly competitive, zero-sum setting. During that discussion, a first-year law student—who had recently been through the soul-trying experience of the first set of law-school finals but who still did not know how he had done—related the following experience, which I share with his permission: When I came to BYU Law School, I immediately developed a big, fat crush on my entire 1L class: they were the nicest, smartest, most interesting people that I had ever been around. . . . [Even though] I realized right away that I was outgunned, outsmarted, and outpaced in every class . . . , I didn’t resent the successes of my peers; they were . . . my friends, and I liked them. . . . As classes ended, [however,] and our 1L class threw all its weight, collectively and individually . . . , toward finals, I was anxious. The anxiety grew and turned black. I studied hard and long, but I felt more insecure the more I studied. The student went on to say that he began to stay away from his classmates because each interaction with them increasingly convinced him that they knew more about the subject than he did and that he was, therefore, destined to fail. He became isolated and alone. He then related: I was praying early one morning about finals, asking for help to do my best [or even to just pass the class], and I began describing the bleak feelings I harbored, and I asked for help. After a few minutes, I [suddenly] found myself [praying] not [just] for myself but for my classmates, and not just for those few that I knew . . . struggled [with the material,] as I did, but for the gifted and the talented as well. I prayed that they would do their best, that they would have peace and clarity. As I prayed for them . . . , I felt a surge of love for the classmates I had admired and had liked so much in the beginning. He then began to reengage with his fellow students, not just to learn from them but with the thought that he might actually have something he could offer to them. At that point his stress level dropped dramatically, his learning increased considerably, and his view of law school—and of the true purpose of a BYU education—was transformed. He was no longer involved in an individual contest against every one of his classmates. He was part of a loving, caring compact society that had been gathered together to help each member succeed. This kind of experience and countless others like it are made possible because students, faculty, and staff are gathered together in a setting that allows each of us to progress both intellectually and spiritually in ways that develop our character and lead to lives of unending learning and service. You students have the rare opportunity to be part of that kind of gathering—to be part of a compact society that God has prepared to help you learn and develop Christlike attributes. You are not here by accident. You have been gathered here by God. Whatever your background, whatever your talents, whatever your challenges or perceived weaknesses, you are a vital part of this gathering. You have something to gain from and something to offer in your interactions with those around you. May each of you recognize and delight in the blessings of being fully engaged in this unique kind of gathering “of learners and lifters”26 is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> There are at least two key ways in which we are already distinctive from most other universities. And when you put these two features together, I believe they make us truly unique in ways that are consistent with our prophetically approved mission. It is a pleasure to welcome all of you to our annual university conference and a pleasure to see you here. The past year has gone by very quickly—at least for me. That is a good sign. We often hear that time flies when you are having fun. As it turns out, studies confirm that that is true. One study noted that people experience time differently depending on what they are doing and how they feel about that particular activity. “Time consistently sped up when subjects were busy, happy, concentrating, or socializing . . . and slowed down . . . when subjects were bored, tired, or sad.”1 By that measure, this past year has been a very good one. In that same vein, I feel compelled as I begin my remarks to note that another time-­perception study “found that a speech seems to go by more quickly to the person who gives it than to a person who listens to it.”2 Consider yourself forewarned. If I am still happy at the end, it doesn’t mean that you need to be. By other more objective measures, this past year has been a success on many fronts. We have seen that in the presentation before. We have also seen the completion of several construction projects, including the Marriott Center Annex, another residence hall, a new central building at the Heritage Halls complex, and the multiyear Campus Drive redesign project. We saw more than 12,000 of our students participate in Y-Serve projects during the year. The men’s volleyball team played in the national championship game for the second year in a row, the women’s volleyball team made it to the sweet sixteen for the fifth year in a row, and, reflecting the overall strength of all the athletic teams, the BYU Athletics program finished just outside the top 10 percent in the Learfield Directors’ Cup, which measures the overall performance of the nearly three hundred Division I NCAA schools. We also made important strides on key academic initiatives. The BYU Online program is on pace. Its goal is to expand the number of online offerings available to our matriculated students so that by 2020, each BYU student will be able to take at least fifteen hours of credit online before graduation. This fall semester BYU Online will be offering 109 sections of fifty-four courses, with a current enrollment of more than 5,500 students. We made similar progress on our Inspiring Learning Initiative. We announced this initiative last fall. Its purpose is to help our students have experiences that motivate them to learn in ways that lead to revelation, thus promoting learning that is inspiring, in both senses of that word. Additional funds from two different sources were provided this year to allow more students to have that kind of experience. More than $1 million were made available to the colleges and departments for inspiring learning projects as a result of a reallocation of funds from the university’s operating budget. In addition, generous donors have contributed $6 million for this initiative so far this year, with $1.2 million being made available for immediate student use and the rest going toward our goal of creating a $120 million endowment by the end of 2021. Let me share with you a small slice of the impact that these inspiring learning experiences have had on some of our students. [A video was shown.] This video represents just a fraction of the thousands of students who have had the opportunity to participate in the kinds of experiences that are part of our Inspiring Learning Initiative. Most departments have equally powerful stories of their own. “In the Lord’s Way” It has been a great year. But there is work still to be done. As our university conference theme for 2017 suggests, we gather together with our outstanding students at this university so that we “may be taught more perfectly, and have experience.”3 Today I hope to provide some insights—at a general level—on how we might accomplish that goal. This past April, Elder Dallin H. Oaks, who is not only a former president of the university but currently the chair of the Executive Committee of the BYU Board of Trustees, addressed the leadership of the university. He began his remarks by repeating what he had said to a similar group of leaders in August 2014, shortly after I became president. I have learned to pay particular attention when prophets, seers, and revelators repeat a message. I have thought much about the following statement that Elder Oaks made on both occasions: [I] firmly believe that it is the destiny of Brigham Young University to become what those prophetic statements predicted it would become. But inherent in being the University of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the reality that this great goal will not be attained in exactly the same way that other universities have achieved their greatness. With your help, it will become the great university of the Lord—not in the world’s way but in the Lord’s way.4 Three things are apparent in this statement: 1. BYU has a prophetically proclaimed ­destiny to become a great university. 2. We have a critical part to play in realizing that destiny. 3. We will achieve that goal in a way that is different from that by which other universities have achieved their greatness. Elder Oaks’s statement is remarkably similar to two statements made by President Spencer W. Kimball—one during his landmark second-century address, given while Elder Oaks was president, and the other during the inauguration of BYU president Jeffrey R. Holland. Speaking at the centennial celebration of the founding of this institution in October 1975, President Kimball stated: As previous First Presidencies have said, and we say again to you, we expect (we do not simply hope) that Brigham Young University will “become a leader among the great universities of the world.” To that expectation I would add, “Become a unique university in all of the world!”5 At President Holland’s inauguration five years later, President Kimball repeated the same quote almost verbatim, with nearly the only difference being that instead of saying we should “become” a unique university, President Kimball stated that we should “remain” a unique university.6 Note again the three critical elements: 1. BYU has a prophetically declared destiny to become a great university. 2. Those prophets expect—not merely hope—that we will do our part to fulfill that destiny. 3. Achieving that destiny requires that we do things differently from other universities—that we be unique. Ways in Which We Are Unique Unique is an interesting word. It means literally “one of its kind”7—“unico,” we say in Spanish. Something that is unique is not just distinctive from some others; it is truly different from them all. President Kimball used the terms unique or uniqueness eight times in his second-century address. Given that repetition, as well as the renewed emphasis given the concept by Elder Oaks, I have spent considerable time thinking about how we are and how we should be unique. The latter is more important than the former. There is little point in being different for difference’s sake; that will not help us achieve our prophetically declared destiny. We must be unique in the way the Lord wants us to be unique, in ways that are consistent with our board-approved—which means prophetically approved—mission. There are at least two key ways in which we are already distinctive from most other universities. And when you put these two features together, I believe they make us truly unique in ways that are consistent with our prophetically approved mission. First, unlike most major private universities that started off as faith-based institutions, BYU has remained closely aligned with and is closely directed by its sponsoring church. As Elder Oaks observed last April: For many years, religiously affiliated colleges and universities have been steadily disappearing, some by formal disaffiliation and some by institutional drift. Today, they are a tiny minority without clear definitions to distinguish them from private secular and even public institutions.8 Many of you will be familiar with this phenomenon, which has been well chronicled.9 The trend toward secularization is so strong that one scholar has opined that any religious university “‘will find it extremely difficult’ to maintain this [religious] affiliation if it also seeks to attain or preserve a national reputation.”10 In other words, many observers today believe that religious universities like ours have a choice: we can either become secular or second-rate. There is no middle ground. We resolutely believe that this is a false dichotomy. Though now clearly a minority position, that firm belief that there is a positive connection between faith and learning is shared by a number of institutions, including our sister institutions of higher education in the Church Educational System: BYU–Idaho, BYU–Hawaii, and LDS Business College. Like BYU, each of these schools is fully committed to the proposition that faith enhances rather than detracts from the acquisition and development of truth and knowledge. That commitment is built into every fiber of the institutional structure of all the CES schools, including BYU. And that commitment increasingly distinguishes us all from other universities, even some that maintain a formal religious affiliation. The second way in which we are distinct from some other universities, however, also differentiates us to a degree from the other CES institutions. While all the CES institutions of higher education share the deep common commitment to the reality of the connection between faith and education, we are the only one of the CES schools that requires, as a fundamental part of our mission, that faculty members excel not only in the classroom but also in the research arena. Thus, while we are first and foremost committed to our students—and to teaching them in the Lord’s way—we also ask faculty members to reinforce and enhance that primary teaching mission with world-class research. Just as there are skeptics about the ability of a university to be both first-class and faithful, there are also some who question whether a university can maintain both a primary teaching focus and a significant research focus. A recent Deseret News editorial noted the difference between world-class research institutions like Harvard and Stanford on the one hand and excellent universities like BYU–Idaho—whose sole focus is on teaching—on the other. The editorial recognized the need for both types of universities in modern society. However, it also noted that schools that focus primarily on research run the risk of losing sight of the well-being and education of their students. The authors then opined: The solution may be for research institutions to take on more research and teaching schools to become better at teaching. For institutions in the messy middle—schools that fall between top-tier research schools and strictly vocational colleges—leaders would do well to pause . . . and simply ask if increased scholarly production is really worth the price to students.11 That observation contains echoes of the earlier noted skepticism about the compatibility of faith and greatness as a university. Just as some would assert that universities will have to choose to be either secular or second-rate, some will assert that schools will have to choose to be excellent at either research or teaching but not both. They will contend that schools in “the messy middle,” in these two regards, are doomed to fail. I believe that on these two issues—the compatibility of faith and learning and the compatibility of teaching and research—we at BYU are in the messy middle. We are clearly in the thinly populated middle position on these two matters because we reject both the dichotomy between faith and education as well as that between teaching and research. And our position is certainly messy in some ways as we find ourselves straddling two divides that most believe are slipping further and further apart. But being in this precarious position should be reason for hope and not despair, for being in the messy middle on these two issues makes us unique in ways that may allow us to achieve our prophetically declared destiny. As Brené Brown observed in a different context, “The middle is messy, but it’s also where the magic happens.”12 I believe that when viewed in the light of gospel truths, these two seemingly irreconcilable dichotomies become mutually reinforcing convergences that produce a truly unique kind of education that is part of our prophetically declared destiny. A Link Between Research and Student Learning Properly understood, belief in gospel truths and adherence to gospel principles can enhance the kind of learning that marks a great university. In a speech entitled “Education for Eternity,” given in September 1967, President Kimball noted that one of the things that makes universities great is the ability to produce great artists, writers, and scientists who, in turn, have a profound impact on the world. He then observed how the learning process that produces such luminaries can be enhanced at a university that understands, teaches, and practices the precepts of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Take a da Vinci or a Michelangelo or a Shakespeare and give him a total knowledge of the plan of salvation of God and personal revelation and . . . then take a look at the statues he will carve and the murals he will paint and the masterpieces he will produce.13 Because of our close connection and clear alignment with the Church, we are uniquely positioned to help budding authors, artists, and scientists understand how the plan of salvation can shed illuminating light on every subject they study. And because of our collective commitment to live in accordance with gospel principles, our students and faculty are uniquely positioned to experience the kind of revelatory learning that only the Holy Ghost can provide. Thus faith-based teaching can produce a kind of learning that makes universities great in the truest sense, thereby providing evidence that, contrary to the assertions of some, faith enhances rather than detracts from true learning. Similarly, I believe that first-class research can enhance rather than detract from student learning and development. Elder Oaks identified the key to this belief in his remarks at the April 2017 leadership retreat. He first noted President Kimball’s assertion that BYU could produce “brilliant stars in drama, literature, music, sculpture, painting, science, and in all the scholarly graces.”14 In the 2017 leadership conference, Elder Oaks then quoted John S. Tanner’s insightful observation about President Kimball’s remarkable statement: As I reread [this] now-familiar charge to become a “refining host” for “brilliant stars,” it struck me that President Kimball was thinking primarily about the accomplishments of BYU students, not faculty. . . . This fact can serve as a salutary reminder for us about the fundamental purpose of scholarship at BYU. It is not, and must never be, to satisfy our own vainglory nor to advance our own careers. Nor even is it solely to advance truth and knowledge, though this is a worthy purpose and one specifically endorsed by BYU’s institutional objectives. The primary purpose for the Church’s large investment in faculty scholarship and creative work at BYU is to enable us to be a refining host for our students.15 This inspired linkage between research and student learning does away with the seemingly irreconcilable dichotomy between the two. Research is to be an endeavor “among both faculty and students,”16 as our mission statement plainly declares. The primary aim for research is student development—a distinctive, if not unique, primary aim for universities that value faculty research so highly. This type of refining learning and development can best occur when the research is cutting-edge, at the frontiers of knowledge. There is a difference between being in a lab conducting routine experiments with predictable results designed to help students see in action principles they have learned in the ­classroom—something which many of us experienced in high school—and being part of a team that is seeking a hitherto unknown solution to a pressing problem with real-life implications, such as the discovery of a cure for Alzheimer’s disease or the development of a lightweight but impenetrable bulletproof shield. Both of these are inspiring learning experiences in which our students have been involved, as the video showed. As enlightening and instructive as it is to be in a chemistry lab recreating experiments that have already been done, it pales in comparison to the intellectually stimulating, sweat-inducing, spiritually stretching experience of being involved in making a truly new discovery—a discovery that may require and produce revelation about both the matter being studied and the individuals performing the study. Thus, as our mission statement makes clear, this is a place “where a commitment to excellence is expected”17—including with respect to faculty research. And it is also a place where “the full realization of human potential [of our students] is pursued.”18 First-class research whose focus is on student development achieves both of these aims. The Challenges This uniquely student-focused approach to world-class research is at the heart of our current emphasis on inspiring learning. Faculty-mentored student research on cutting-edge topics is one of the primary focuses of that initiative—an initiative whose aim is clearly and exclusively on student learning. It produces a unique kind of student learning that in some instances can happen only at a place like BYU, where the most important end result is not the discovery of new knowledge or faculty development but student revelation through research. I believe this unique combination of faith-based teaching and student-centered research is a key ingredient to the kind of holistic learning and character development that President Kimball called “education for eternity”—the kind of student learning and character development that is at the heart of our prophetically declared destiny. However, this lofty view of our potential should not obscure the reality that such an endeavor is not easy. We are in the messy middle on these two key issues. And that position is sometimes precarious and almost always difficult and soul stretching. Elder Oaks identified some ever-present challenges that this unique combination of faith-based teaching and student-centered research brings with it. Let me discuss three of them, and let me commend to you a reading of Elder Oaks’s entire talk for an understanding of others he identified. First Challenge Combining faithfulness with learning—and research with teaching—requires a lot of extra effort. Our commitment to faith-based teaching requires, as President Kimball observed, “that every professor and teacher in this institution . . . keep his [or her] subject matter bathed in the light and color of the restored gospel and have all his [or her] subject matter perfumed lightly with the spirit of the gospel.”19 That is not an easy task. It requires a ­thorough understanding of not only our disciplines but also the scriptures. It requires that we be worthy of the companionship of the Holy Ghost, because revelation to our students in the classroom often requires revelation to a faculty member in class preparation. And revelation does not come cheap. As President Kimball observed, “Perspiration must precede inspiration.”20 Similarly, it is not always easy to keep the focus of research on student learning. Faculty members must be passionate enough about both discovery and their discipline to produce the energy needed to sustain their research through its inevitably difficult stages when no answers seem to be available. But at the same time, they must not become so overzealous to make a new discovery that students become mere instruments in the process rather than the desired end. Again, maintaining this balance requires extra effort. Furthermore, as Elder Oaks noted, there is in these matters a challenge for the administration. We need to properly recognize and incentivize both faith-based teaching and student-centered research—something that is quite difficult. It is easy to count the number of publications that research produces; it is much more difficult but more important to evaluate how much impact the research endeavor has on the students. Thus, achieving our goal in the unique way we desire will require ongoing and constant extra effort on every level. Second Challenge A second ever-present challenge to maintaining both our faithfulness in teaching and our student-oriented focus in research is the reality that neither of these things is likely to bring us much of the praise of the world. And for most of us, including me, the allure of that praise is ever present and ever powerful. Moreover, when we mark ourselves as unique, we can easily become arrogant. We must constantly guard against the pitfall of pride. In his classic April 1989 general conference address, President Ezra Taft Benson reminded us that “pride is a damning sin in the true sense of that word. It limits or stops progression.”21 That is true of individuals and it is true of institutions, including this university. Pride can become a—in fact, the—great stumbling block. Pride is not always easy to discern, as it is an internal attitude that does not always manifest itself externally. As President Benson observed, “Our motives for the things we do are where the sin [of pride] is manifest.”22 Therefore, one key to our success will be having the right motivation. If we are motivated solely by pride, we will fail. So then what should motivate us? President Benson noted that the essence “of pride is enmity—enmity toward God and enmity toward our fellowmen.”23 If the essence of pride is enmity—or hatred toward our fellowmen—the antidote to pride would seem to be the opposite of enmity, which is charity, or perfect love for our fellow beings. Thus we will fully achieve our goal only if we are motivated more by charity than by pride and more by a desire to help our students than by a desire to compare favorably with our peers. The difficulty is that, as noted, motivation cannot easily be measured—at least not by other human beings. Only we—and God—know what truly motivates us. Moreover, the temptation to gratify our vain ambition is so constant that we will likely never reach the point at which we can say that we are sufficiently humble and charitable and that we need not worry about those issues anymore. Self-inspection that is sincere enough to produce personal revelation from God is required. And it is required daily. It is not unlike the observation of Thomas L. Shaffer, who, in an excellent book-length analysis of whether it is possible to be a Christian and a lawyer, concluded that the complexities of law and life are so great and the temptation to deviate from Christian values while practicing law are so constant that the answer to that question must always remain contingent. Said he: I often think that the only way to be both a Christian and lawyer is to ask, every day, “Is it possible to be both a Christian and a lawyer?” and to be open, every day, to the thought that it is not possible.24 Similarly, perhaps the only way we can remain sufficiently humble and charitable is to ask ourselves, every day, the question “Am I sufficiently humble and charitable?” And we need to be open, every day, to the thought that we may not be. Third Challenge Elder Oaks noted, “To accomplish its mission, BYU must have all parts of its community united in pursuing it.”25 Prophets have set forth an ambitious agenda for this university and for those involved in it. It is not an easy agenda, and it will require all of us to change and to work together—not just in one department or in one college and not just among the faculty. We will need everyone on this campus to be committed to the task, because we are in the messy middle, and all of us from time to time will need reminders that it is in the messy middle that magic—no, miracles—happen. As noted, none of this will be easy, but it will be enlivening, exhilarating, and, yes, ethereal. At times we will need to forge new paths. That is what uniqueness is all about. But the impact will be larger than we may think. Let me illustrate with one final example. Six years ago a group of engineering students engaged in a capstone project involving the creation of a water-well drill to help people in Tanzania obtain an ongoing source of clean water. The lack of clean water is a major cause of disease and poverty in many countries, including several in Africa. The project began when John Renouard, a BYU alum who had majored in finance, traveled to Africa with his family. John was profoundly moved by the plight of those who did not have access to clean water. He formed an organization called WHOlives—with the word WHO standing for water, health, and ­opportunity. Through a series of events I will describe after showing another video, John connected with the BYU College of Engineering and Technology. Then a group of students, working with their faculty mentor, set out to address the problem. All they knew was that they needed to have a drill that was human powered, could be easily transported from village to village without large trucks, and could drill down hundreds of feet through different kinds of material. They were undergraduates doing research with profound real-life consequences under the tutelage of a faculty mentor. Let me share their story. [A video was shown.] The last sentence of our mission statement says: We believe the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission . . . will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University’s influence in a world we wish to improve.26 What we have just seen is exhibit A. Hundreds of thousands of people in twenty-three countries have access to clean water because of the efforts of these undergraduate students. But, of equal importance—maybe of more importance—the lives of the students, and others, were also profoundly changed. One of the students, Kenneth Langley, went on to receive his master’s degree in fluid dynamics and is currently working on his PhD at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia. He indicated that when he began studying engineering, he just wanted to work on airplanes, but being involved in this humanitarian project changed his career focus. It also changed his outlook: Had I not gone to Tanzania as part of my capstone project, I would never have had the courage to make the step to go to Saudi Arabia, where I am now. Going on that trip also gave me a desire to learn more about the world and to get to know more people in different parts of the world. Another student, Nathan Toone, who is now working as an engineer for Boeing in St. Louis, explained another profound way in which students were affected: It was a spiritual experience. There was a lot of inspiration and there were prayers answered that allowed us to even get the drill to Tanzania. And once there, there were other little miracles in that we would meet the right person or we would just have happened to find this drilling expert who showed us where we could find water and happened to make this connection over here with a farmer who had a field that we could drill in. All these little things appeared to be coincidences, but we knew that they weren’t. We knew that there was something bigger going on that was helping our success. That this was a work of inspiration had been clear at the outset to John Renouard, the BYU alum whose desire to bless the people of Africa was the genesis of the program. As I have mentioned, John started his organization WHOlives shortly after traveling to Africa with his family and seeing the need for clear water. But he didn’t know exactly what he needed to do at that point. He went online and saw a brick-making machine that, it turned out, had been developed in an engineering capstone project at BYU. With that in mind, John called the capstone office, was informed that the responsible person was out of town, and then left his number. John described what happened a few weeks later: In the middle of the night, I had a dream. It was strong enough that it got me out of bed to my kitchen table to write down what I had seen. Intuitively, I knew that it was a drill, but I am not a well driller. I was a finance major, and I lived in Southern California. My water came from a tap. But I knew that this was something that I needed to jot down. That was the first miracle. The next one happened the next day when I got a call from the BYU capstone program asking me if I had a program or a project that they could work on. John then met with faculty from the engineering program to explain the need that he had observed in Africa. But he did not give them his specific drill ideas. As he put it: One of the great concepts of capstone projects is that you don’t go to the students and tell them, “Go build this,” and then give them the schematics and everything. You tell them, “This is what we want to do. Now go and do it.” After several months of work by the students, John received a text. As John explained: The text said, “We sent you a CAD drawing. Can you open it?” And I did. When I opened it, I saw that drill, and I recognized it from my dream. It was like, “There it is! How did they do that?” It was amazing. Inspiring learning—this is the kind of learning that can “assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life”27 by helping them see the hand of the Lord operating in their lives. It is a unique kind of education that faith-based teaching and student-centered research can produce. I bear my witness that this university has a prophetically declared destiny. It is part of the rolling forth of the kingdom of God on earth. May each of us have the courage, vision, and faith needed to do those things that the Lord expects of us in moving this work along is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> The family proclamation clearly declares that “each [of us] is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.” It is wonderful to be here with you today, to know that you have arrived safely from your travels, and to see in you the bright hope of anticipation that accompanies a new year and a new semester. We Have a Divine Nature Let me begin with a story that may sound all too familiar to some of you. The airport had been packed for hours. The usually crowded holiday travel conditions were exacerbated by weather-related delays and cancellations at other airports. Hundreds of frustrated travelers were scrambling from one gate to another as they sought alternate ways to reach their destinations. At one gate, the line to talk to the agent stretched for more than fifty yards. One of the passengers in the line was a well-dressed and obviously impatient man. As he glanced at his watch with ever-increasing frequency and tapped his foot at an ever-increasing rate, it was obvious to all around him that he was not a person who was accustomed to waiting. Finally the man could stand it no longer. He bolted from his place in line and stomped up to the gate. Pounding his hand on the desk, he bellowed, “Do you know who I am?” An awkward silence instantly gripped the area. The agent at the desk calmly picked up her telephone and, in a steady voice, said, “We may need a little additional help at Gate 19. There is a man down here who doesn’t know who he is.” My question to you today is, Do you know who you are? This question may be more complicated than it at first appears. If someone were to ask you right now who you are, some of you might answer by identifying yourself as a BYU student—a worthwhile identity. Others might be more specific and identify themselves by their major or their year in school. Some would answer based on their home or place of origin. Those of you from Texas know what I mean. Some might identify themselves by an extracurricular activity in which they engage, a sport they play, or a talent they possess. Some might choose to identify themselves by their church calling, by an office they hold, or by their relationships with others, such as wife, husband, father, or mother. Each of these answers would be truthful in the sense that they accurately describe a portion of who you are. And to some extent they may be the most appropriate response because of the context in which the question is asked. Our response to the question Who are you? will likely vary from time to time and place to place. And sometimes those answers, in the abstract, will contradict one another. Thus, knowing who we really are can get a bit complicated. But what if you had to fully identify yourself in a single sentence? Could you in one sentence describe yourself in a way that would be accurate in whatever circumstance or whatever stage of life you might find yourself? It wouldn’t be that you are a freshman, for that will change. Or that you are a BYU student, for that will also change—even though there are times when graduation seems an eternity away. Such a statement of who you really are would need to describe your fully defined being in a way that is not dependent on time or temporary circumstances. That kind of answer to the question of who you are is a bit more challenging to provide. Fortunately, prophets, seers, and revelators have provided one example of such an answer in “The Family: A Proclamation to the World.” The family proclamation clearly declares that “each [of us] is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.”1 Most of us are familiar with that statement, as we have recited and sung portions of it since our Primary days.2 Yet I wonder if familiarity has caused us to overlook the depth, breadth, and power of the truths this identity statement contains. Note, for example, that the description is universal. It applies to everyone in this audience, everyone on this campus, every person who lives on this earth, and all who have lived or will ever live on this earth and on worlds without number.3 “Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents . . . [with] a divine nature and destiny.” Note also that the description transcends time, referring to our past, our present, and our future. It describes our beginning. As President Marion G. Romney once observed: In origin, [men and women are] son[s and daughters] of God. The spirits of men [and women] “are begotten sons and daughters unto God” (D&C 76:24). Through that birth process, self-existing intelligence was organized into individual spirit beings.4 The family proclamation then goes on to describe a key feature of our present state: our divine nature. Within each one of us, regardless of our own unique circumstances, challenges, and even mistakes we have made, there is currently an essence of the divine. It is part of our nature—a part of who we are that does not change. Our grade point average may dip below 3.0 or 2.0 or even 1.0, we may not have been on a date for months or years, we may consider ourselves unlovable, we may have just lost our temper with someone we love, we may have been hurt by someone else, but we still have a divine nature. It is part of who we are now. The statement also describes what can be our future, our divine destiny—our ability through the exercise of our agency made possible by Christ through His atoning sacrifice—to become like our Heavenly Parents. Finally, note that in each of these three time periods—past, present, and future—the common reference point is God. Because He begat our spirits in the past, we currently partake of His divine nature, and we can ultimately become like Him. If we want to fully know who we are, we must first gain some understanding of who God is. As Joseph Smith explained, “If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves.”5 Understanding that we are children of Heavenly Parents—sharing Their divine nature and possessing the potential to be like Them—can bring great power into our lives. The prophet Moses learned this important point early in his ministry. In the revelation recorded in Moses 1, “Moses was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain”6 to visit with God. God first introduced Himself to Moses by informing Moses of some of His attributes.7 Once having established who He is, God then informed Moses about Moses in verse 4: “Behold, thou art my son.” In verse 6 God emphasized that relationship again, telling Moses, “I have a work for thee . . . , my son.” In verse 7 God referred to their kinship one more time: “This one thing I show unto thee . . . , my son.” Clearly God wanted Moses to understand at the outset not only who He—God—was but also Moses’s relationship to Him. And the reason God wanted Moses to have this critical information quickly becomes apparent as the story unfolds. As soon as God left Moses to himself, Satan appeared to tempt Moses—as he often does when important things are about to happen in our lives. Moses’s response to the temptation is revealing. “Who art thou?” Moses inquired of Satan. “For behold, I am a son of God.”8 Moses’s understanding of his direct relationship to God gave him the power to resist Satan’s temptation and eventually the power to banish Satan from his life. It can similarly give us the power to deal with the inevitable ups and downs of college life and the other vicissitudes that are part of our mortal existence. When asked, “How can we help those struggling with [a personal challenge]?” [President Russell M. Nelson] instructed, “Teach them their identity and their purpose.”9 There is great power in understanding who we truly are. We Are Beloved Sons and Daughters of Heavenly Parents There are two particular words in the family proclamation’s statement of identity that can easily be overlooked but which contain profound truths that sooner or later all of us need to understand more fully. The first word is beloved. We are not just sons and daughters of Heavenly Parents; we are beloved sons and daughters. Because we are literally His offspring, His crowning creation, God loves us more deeply than we can comprehend. His sole purpose, His supreme joy, His work, and His glory come from seeing us succeed.10 As C. S. Lewis put it: We were made not primarily that we may love God . . . but that God may love us, that we may become objects in which the Divine love may rest “well pleased.”11 It is easy to underestimate God’s love for us. Indeed, with our finite minds and imperfect bodies, it is impossible for us to fully comprehend it in this stage of our existence. Yet there is no aspect of God’s character that is more central to His divine nature and none more critical to the development of our faith in Him. God’s love for us is so much a part of what makes Him God that the ancient apostle John taught that “God is love.”12 God loves each one of us with a love that is greater, more powerful, and more constant than we fully appreciate. We should feel His love more often than we do. And as we feel that love more fully, it should—and will—change us. Indeed, God requires that we be changed by His love. Christ taught, “A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you.”13 In order to more fully understand God’s love for us, we should take care that we do not unintentionally reverse the commandment that we love others as God loves us—that we not focus so much on our own imperfections that we believe that God’s love is like ours, instead of believing that our love can become like God’s. As strange as that statement may sound, I believe there are many who underestimate the reach and constancy of God’s perfect love for us because they analogize it to the less-than-perfect love we can muster for our fellow beings, thereby figuratively dragging God’s celestial love down to the telestial level at which our love currently operates. In its most common form, this reversal of the commandment manifests itself in the mistaken belief that if God really loved us, our lives would be free from much of the toil we experience in life—or in the related erroneous belief that the fact that we struggle in life is a sign that either God’s love for us is diminished or that we have failed to merit it and are therefore beyond its reach. This misunderstanding is so common that for some it is a stumbling block to believing that God exists. If God loves His children and if He is all powerful, some ask, why do so many of His children suffer? To these skeptics, the existence of pain, sorrow, and injustice in the world conclusively establishes that not only does God not love us, He does not exist at all. But as C. S. Lewis explained: The problem of reconciling human suffering with the existence of a God who loves, is only insoluble so long as we attach a trivial meaning to the word “love.”14 In that regard, Lewis asserted, we often confuse God’s love with human kindness. To quote Lewis: There is kindness in Love: but Love and kindness are not coterminous. . . . Kindness, merely as such, cares not whether its object becomes good or bad, provided only that it escapes suffering.15 Many of us want a God who is kind—by which kindness we mean the desire to see others . . . happy; not happy in this way or in that, but just happy. What would really satisfy us would be a God who said of anything we happened to like doing, “What does it matter so long as they are contented?” We want, in fact, not so much a Father in Heaven as a grandfather in heaven—a senile benevolence who, as they say, “liked to see young people enjoying themselves,” and whose plan for the universe was simply that it might be truly said at the end of each day, “a good time was had by all.”16 But that is not God’s plan for us. He loves us more than that. He wants us to become like Him. He wants us to experience the fulness of joy He enjoys. And He loves us enough that He will do whatever it takes for us to reach that goal—­including allowing His Son to suffer indescribable pain for us and including allowing us to experience challenges in our lives. God loves us so much that He is willing to let us experience things that are hard, difficult, and soul-stretching—and He does it not because He does not love us but ­precisely because He does. This does not mean that every struggle we experience and every hurt we bear is inflicted on us by God. Many of our challenges are the result of our own bad choices or those of others. Agency is an inevitable part of the plan. God does not promise that every choice we or others make will be consistent with His will. But He does promise that He can make everything we experience work together for our good.17 He can make all our soul-stretching experiences—regardless of their source—part of the process by which we can become like Him. And that is His goal because He loves us so much. We Have a Divine, or Godly, Destiny That leads to the second key word in the identity statement in the family proclamation: destiny. We not only have a divine nature, we have a divine, or godly, destiny. Because we are literally Their offspring, we possess the power to become like our Heavenly Parents. That knowledge can also transform and empower us. President Henry B. Eyring recently shared a personal example of this truth with the students at the LDS Business College. He related how he felt overwhelmed when taking some physics and math classes as an undergraduate. He said: As time wore on, my discouragement led me to feel that it was useless to study. . . . I began to think of quitting and doing something easier. It was on a night during that time of discouragement when I received the help that made all the difference for me. . . . Help came as a voice, an actual voice in my mind. . . . The words voiced were these: “When you realize who you really are, you will be sorry that you didn’t try harder.” I didn’t know then all that those words meant. . . . But I knew then what to do. I went to work. I felt that I must have more ability to learn than I could see in myself. . . . I began to try to understand that message of encouragement. By pondering and working during the years that followed, I came to realize who I really was. I was a spirit child of God. I had inherent in me the potential to learn what He knows. Because of the Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ and my faith in Him, my sins could be washed away. . . . I could receive the gift of the Holy Ghost as a companion. And I came to know that by the power of the Holy Ghost, we may know the truth of all things.18 President Eyring stated that this experience, and others like it, “gave [him] the confidence to keep trying harder, even when the learning was difficult.”19 That can be true with you as well. But there will still be times when the gap between the godlike state that is our destiny and our current imperfect state appears so immense that it seems overwhelming. At times we may find ourselves surrounded by constant reminders that we are falling short. When that happens, let me suggest three things we can do to retain, or regain, the eternal perspective that changes the knowledge of our potential from a burden into a blessing. First, we need to recognize and remember that we are not alone in our struggles. God has placed others in our lives to help sustain us. They may include parents, siblings, roommates, or friends who may be praying and rooting for your success. But they will also include others whom you can serve. There are few more powerful antidotes to feeling inadequate than serving others in need. When you are struggling, if you will spend more time thinking about what you can do for someone else and less time thinking about your own limitations, you will find that your confidence in yourself and in God’s ability to work through you will increase. Doing godlike acts of service enables us to both become more like God and to feel in greater measure His love for us. More important, even if you feel completely bereft of human companionship, remember that you are never truly alone. Because of His great atoning sacrifice, Christ knows how we feel and He knows how to succor and strengthen us.20 Because of His great love for us, which mirrors exactly that of the Father,21 He will not—He ­cannot—abandon us, as long as we let Him in our lives.22 Second, we need to be more patient with the process. We need to worry less about the speed at which we are moving and more about the direction we are going. We will not fully realize our divine potential in this life. And while we need to make wise use of our time in our mortal existence,23 we should remember that God does not deal with time in the same way we do. In fact, time as we understand it may not bind Him at all.24 As Alma noted, “Time only is measured unto men.”25 Because speed is a measure of distance over time,26 if time becomes less relevant, so does speed. Thus, in eternal things, such as our ongoing progress in becoming like God, direction is more important than speed. In the long run, the direction we are headed matters much more than the rate at which we are moving. If we become frustrated because we are not progressing as fast as we feel we should, we need to remember that we progress “line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little.”27 The key is to make sure we are headed in the right direction. From time to time this will require a course correction. That is what we call repentance, which is really just a turning back toward God to go in the right direction.28 If we will continue to head in the right direction, God will make up the difference in His own time. Finally, and most important, when we are feeling overwhelmed in our quest for perfection, we need to return to the first truth in the identity statement of the family proclamation. We are beloved sons and daughters of Heavenly Parents. God loves us. That is a fundamental truth on which our accurate understanding of who we really are is based. As Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf testified in the most recent general conference: God knows you. You are His child. He loves you. Even when you think that you are not lovable, He reaches out to you.29 Indeed, as Elder Bruce C. Hafen once observed, “We never have more value in the Lord’s sight than when we are feeling completely worthless.”30 In those moments when you wonder if you can make it, when the challenges seem too much, I urge you to turn to God. More specifically, I plead with you to find a time and a place when you can in all honesty ask God what He really thinks of you. Don’t assume anything. Don’t assume you are worthless, that He is displeased with you, or that He has given up on you. Ask instead, with real intent, the simple questions “Father, what do you think of me? Who am I to you?” I am confident that if you are open, you will be pleasantly surprised by the answers. You will find the truth shared by the ancient apostle Paul: “Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?”31 And I would add, “Or a bad test grade, an angry ­comment, or a failed relationship?” The answer is an emphatic no. Like Paul, I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.32 You are a child of God. You are a beloved spirit son or daughter of Heavenly Parents. Because of that, each of you has a divine nature and destiny. These statements are true. May they be ever in your mind and heart is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> What a magnificent building this is! I like to think of it as one of the temples of learning seen in vision by several during the early years of this institution. It exists as a result of the extraordinary efforts of so many: generous donors, skilled architects and laborers, energetic LDS Philanthropies employees, and dedicated and visionary faculty, staff, and administrators. There are so many to thank that time does not permit a full recital, but I would be remiss if I did not mention five individuals, beginning with Jack Wheatley and Ira Fulton, whose visions of a new engineering building go back nearly twenty years. I also thank Kelly Reeves, who led the LDS Philanthropies effort. And I want to thank, in particular, Alan Parkinson and King Hussein. These two led the way from the very beginning. They attended seemingly innumerable planning meetings, conceptualizing the macro and the micro of what this building should be. They also traveled tirelessly across the country in search of funds—in one case literally taking on the role of Moses, leading the way to a new promised engineering land. Through sheer determination and amazing consecration, they, with help from so many others, almost willed this building into existence. I thank them for their leadership, and I thank so many others for following their lead. Thanks is also due to those who—long before any of us were involved at BYU—laid the foundation for the outstanding engineering programs this building will house. Included among them is the person for whom the former engineering building was named: Harvey Fletcher. I hope that our faculty and students who occupy this building come to know Harvey, not just as the name of the café but as a role model for what we hope happens in this building. Harvey Fletcher was born and raised in Provo. He initially entered Brigham Young Academy in 1900, a year after he had finished eighth grade—a level of education that he thought was as much as he needed.1 After a year working full-time in the grocery business, he decided to go back to school, later recording that he did so “not because I wanted further education but because I thought it would be fun to be with my schoolmates again.”2 It was with that modest goal that Harvey began his experience at Brigham Young Academy. Like many of our current students, Harvey found that his classes at Brigham Young Academy were a bit more difficult than in his prior school, and, in part because he did not do the assigned work, he failed his first physics class.3 But, showing the resilience we hope our students develop, Harvey retook the course and obtained the highest grade in the class.4 Shortly thereafter he was hired as an assistant in the physics lab, and during his last three years of college at the newly renamed Brigham Young University, he taught physics and math.5 After his graduation from BYU in 1907, Harvey attended the University of Chicago, where he worked in the lab of Nobel Prize–winning physicist Robert A. Millikan.6 Four years later he was awarded a PhD in physics, graduating summa cum laude, the first PhD student to receive that honor in the Physics Department at that university.7 Demonstrating a love for BYU that we hope you all develop, Harvey turned down an offer to remain as a professor at the University of Chicago8 in order to return to BYU, where he taught physics for five years.9 He then followed the advice of President Joseph F. Smith10 and accepted an offer to work for Western Electric Company in New York City, where he was appointed director of physical research at Bell Labs.11 While there he was instrumental in the development of electric hearing aids and stereophonic sound.12 He published fifty-one papers and two books and obtained nineteen patents.13 He received honorary degrees from five universities, including Columbia University and the University of Utah.14 Harvey’s was a remarkable journey from failing physics student to award-winning physicist. During the entire journey, Harvey served with deep humility and faith in a number of Church callings, including ten years as president of the Manhattan Branch and six years as president of the New York Stake.15 Following his retirement from Bell Labs, he was appointed as a professor of electrical engineering at Columbia University.16 Three years later—when he was sixty-nine years old—at a stage in life when many of his contemporaries were winding down, Harvey demonstrated the kind of consecrated attitude that we hope our students develop by returning to BYU to become the chair of the newly formed Engineering Department at BYU.17 His arrival was both providential and impactful. When the idea of starting an engineering program was first seriously proposed in 1951, there was some opposition. Some thought it was too ambitious an effort—one that could succeed only by deviating off the university’s chartered course as a primarily undergraduate teaching institution.18 Indeed, formal approval of the program from the board of trustees came with the stipulation that the department not pursue research and that “under no circumstances was the appellation of School of Engineering to be attached to the department.”19 However, the board’s confidence in Harvey’s steadfastness and consecration was such that they were willing to allow the new department to grow, and in 1954, Harvey was named dean of the newly formed College of Physical and Engineering Sciences.20 Harvey Fletcher embodied many of the ideals of a BYU graduate and faculty member. He was a leader in his field of study and also a person of deep-seated faith. He demonstrated that it is possible to be a world-class scholar while being unquestioningly loyal to the principles of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ—that we can succeed in the world of work and the world of ideas not despite our faith in Christ but because of it. This blend of faith and study was part of Harvey’s vision for BYU long before he came back to the school in the 1950s. Thirty years earlier, in 1921, Franklin S. Harris, who had just been named president of BYU and who had been a classmate of Harvey’s at BYU, reached out to Harvey in New York for input as Harris began formulating his plans for the university.21 In a long letter, Harvey offered two observations that describe well our current mission and that I hope those who work and study in this building will take as a personal charge. First, he said, “The quality of the educational work which is done should be second to none.”22 We must, as our mission statement provides, create an atmosphere in which “a commitment to excellence is expected”23 in all we do. Second, and more important, Harvey wrote, “The aim of the school should be to make the students loyal to the Church, and instill into their very being duty to God and their fellow men.”24 So as we begin in this new building, I hope that you, like Harvey Fletcher, engage in educational work that is second to none while having instilled in your very being your duty to God and your fellowmen. May you carry on that legacy is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> That same aim—“to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life”—remains the principal purpose of this university today, as the first line of our mission statement makes clear. The program now calls for greetings by the president. Just what is really expected, however, is far from clear. One experienced president gave this sage advice to a new president about the role he should play at a commencement. “Think of yourself as the body at an Irish wake,” he said. “Your presence is necessary in order to have the party, but no one really expects you to say too much.” With that in mind, I would like to provide just a bit of context for today’s event. The first graduation from this institution came at a time before it was a university. Brigham Young Academy, as it was then known, was formally established in 1875. For its first three decades it was more a combination grammar and secondary school than a university. At the end of the school’s first year, in 1876, the record indicates that “none of [the] students [had] advanced beyond the fifth reader level of grammar school,”1 so no one graduated. The first group to graduate from the Academy came a year later in June 1877, when two women and one man received diplomas recognizing their completion of the teacher preparation program.2 There is no record that any formal ceremony was held. The first “collegiate diploma” was given four years later in 1881 to an exceptional student who had graduated from the high school a year earlier; his name was James E. Talmage.3 Talmage was so bright and accomplished that, for a short period of time, he was both a student and a teacher at the school.4 Things have changed a bit since that time. We no longer check to see if any of our students have gone beyond the fifth reader level of grammar school before we schedule a graduation ceremony, and no high school diplomas are given out. Moreover, we honor a lot more than three students. Today we will recognize more than 5,000 students who will receive bachelor’s degrees, nearly 700 who will receive master’s degrees, and 185 who will receive doctoral degrees. We have come a long way since those early years. At the same time, we are more closely linked to the seemingly distant past than we may realize. As I mentioned, the first person to receive a collegiate degree from what is now BYU was James E. Talmage, who went on to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The oldest graduating student this year (who is seventy years old and who I congratulate today), was born more than a decade after Elder Talmage died in 1933. So I am certain that none of our graduates here today ever met the first recipient of a BYU college degree. Yet there is a direct connection between Elder Talmage and many of today’s graduates. During his time as an educator, Elder Talmage personally mentored a bright young student named J. Reuben Clark Jr. As most of you know, J. Reuben Clark Jr. eventually became a member of the First Presidency of the Church. President Clark credited much of his success in life to the mentoring he received from Elder Talmage.5 Recognizing the profound impact such mentoring had had on him, President Clark reached out to bright young people in his sphere of influence to personally mentor them. Among that select group was Harold B. Lee, a future president of the Church. Following the same pattern, President Lee personally mentored a brilliant scholar and young Church leader named Neal A. Maxwell, another future member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Elder Maxwell in turn personally mentored a number of those whom he identified as potential leaders in the kingdom, including an incredibly bright young medical scholar named Cecil O. Samuelson, who I am confident has had a personal impact on many of the graduates here today and who I know has had a profound influence on me. From Talmage to Clark to Lee to Maxwell to Samuelson and then to you and me—five direct links and we are back to the beginning of this institution, connected to the very first person to have received a college diploma from BYU. But the connection to the past goes beyond mere mentoring genealogy. While many things have changed since the days when James E. Talmage was a student here, the core purpose and focus of this institution have remained the same. During his second year at the Academy, when he was just fifteen years old, Talmage enrolled in the newly formed Normal Department, organized to prepare teachers.6 Talmage kept notes of the lectures given to the department that year by Karl G. Maeser. A line from the notes of the first lecture states: Education boasts of having the highest . . . aim of any avocation in life. The whole range has but one object and purpose, which is to bring us nearer the platform of our God. This object was set forth and pointed out by Christ himself: “Be ye perfect even as your father in heaven is perfect.” This should be a teacher’s watchword.7 That same aim—“to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life”8—remains the principal purpose of this university today, as the first line of our mission statement makes clear. It is a quest that will continue long after you leave this university, and indeed long after you have left this mortal existence. But it is the most important quest in which you will engage. May your education here and your use of that education to serve others in the future be productively employed to that end is my prayer in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> The concept of becoming a Zion people is embedded deep in our theology. In this dispensation, the Lord’s desire for His people to build a Zion society was made apparent even before the Church was organized. Welcome to another school year. It is such a joy to be with you again. Since we met in this capacity last year, there have been so many exciting developments that it would be impossible to list them all. Let me just share some examples of student achievements in this past year. More than 2,000 of our students—an all-time high—had a study-abroad experience this past year, participating in more than 200 programs in seventy-five countries. Truly the world is our campus. At the same time, inspiring learning opportunities were also provided to our students here in Provo. More than 1,100 BYU students registered for on-campus internships. These students worked in teams on projects for businesses and nonprofit organizations throughout the United States. Although the program is offered through the Marriott School of Business, 49 percent of the students who participated were not Marriott School students. On the athletic front, the men’s cross-country team finished third in the nation, and the women’s volleyball team reached the sweet-sixteen round of the NCAA tournament for the sixth consecutive year. Individual students flourished here as well. To cite two of hundreds of examples, art student Julian Harper won the BLOOOM international young artist art competition, beating out more than 2,300 student artists from more than ninety countries. And Anne Thomas was selected as a Gates Scholar, one of only thirty-five undergraduates from across the world who will receive a full-tuition scholarship to Cambridge University under that program. Anne is the fifth BYU Gates Scholar. And so we begin a new year, determined to build on the successes of the past. As I have thought about what I could say to provide some motivating context for what lies ahead of us, my mind was drawn to the prophecy of President John Taylor that was highlighted in President Spencer W. Kimball’s second-century address: You will see the day that Zion will be as far ahead of the outside world in everything pertaining to learning of every kind as we are today in regard to religious matters. You mark my words, and write them down, and see if they do not come to pass.1 This is, for me, a soul-stirring prophecy. Equally stirring is President Kimball’s brief but deepening elaboration: Surely we cannot refuse that rendezvous with history because so much of what is desperately needed by mankind is bound up in our being willing to contribute to the fulfillment of that prophecy.2 As I read this prophecy and President Kimball’s inspired and enthusiastic embrace of the rendezvous with history that it describes, I was struck by two things that had not stood out to me before in my many readings of President Taylor’s statement. First, I noticed that President Taylor indicated that we were to outpace the world with regard to “everything pertaining to learning of every kind.” The prophecy is not, as I had previously assumed, that we would lead the world in the discovery of new information of every kind but that we would be proficient with respect to learning of every kind. As I thought about the emphasis that we are giving to inspiring learning and its unique combination of faith-based teaching and student-centered research, I felt reassured that we are on the right track as our students learn in a manner consistent with gospel principles, which include learning by study, by faith, and by experience. The results of the emphasis on inspiring learning have been most heartwarming. It is one way in which we can be ahead of the world with respect to learning of every kind. Second, I noted that President Taylor did not expressly refer to universities in general or even Brigham Young University in particular when he made his prophecy. It is “Zion” that President Taylor said is destined to be a beacon to the world with respect to learning. This caused me to reflect on the new ideas in learning that are being explored at our sister institutions at BYU–Idaho, BYU–Hawaii, LDS Business College, and BYU–Pathway Worldwide. While each institution has a distinctive mission, each may have something to add to the way in which Zion will outpace the world with respect to learning of every kind. More important for us—and President Kimball made the connection with us—the emphasis on Zion caused me to think about the role BYU plays in building and extending the influence of Zion. The scriptures indicate that “the Lord [is] well pleased that there should be a school in Zion.”3 And exactly thirty years ago, then BYU president Jeffrey R. Holland gave a classic address on that subject in this setting.4 Noting the early and deep doctrinal emphasis on education throughout this dispensation, President Holland posited that “there can be no Zion without” a university.5 Along similar lines, President Merrill J. Bateman urged us to become a Zion university6 and later elaborated on the search for truth at a Zion university.7 Reflecting on all these thoughts, it struck me that it is possible that we will fulfill the destiny outlined in President Taylor’s prophecy only to the extent that we become more Zion-like, both as individuals and as a campus community. Becoming a Zion People The concept of becoming a Zion people is embedded deep in our theology. In this dispensation, the Lord’s desire for His people to build a Zion society was made apparent even before the Church was organized. In April 1829, a year before the Church was formally organized, the Lord instructed Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery that they were to “seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.”8 The same admonition was given in succeeding months to Hyrum Smith, Joseph Knight, and David Whitmer, as recorded in sections 11, 12, and 14 of the Doctrine and Covenants. At that time, the Saints’ understanding of the meaning of the term was vague, at best. It was not until Joseph Smith received the revelation concerning Enoch and his people in connection with the Prophet’s translation of the Bible from June 1830 to February 1831 that modern-day members of the Church began to comprehend the concept of a Zion society in any concrete terms. With that revelation—which is largely recorded in chapters 6 and 7 of the book of Moses—came not only an understanding of what a Zion society is like but also some comprehension of why the people of God in this dispensation should be so concerned with the concept. In the revelation, the Lord made it clear that a new Zion is to come forth in this dispensation—one patterned so completely after Enoch’s Zion that the two societies will literally and physically unite in order to usher in the millennial reign of the Savior.9 In Moses 7:62–63, the Lord stated: And righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare . . . , and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem. And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there. One of the defining characteristics of a Zion society is that people are “of one heart and one mind.”10 I do not believe this means that we all need to think exactly alike on all subjects. However, it does imply a unity of motivation and purpose. The agreed-upon goal or purpose of a Zion society is the welfare of each member of the society. It requires an other-centered rather than a self-centered orientation. The world would have us focus on ourselves and our own accomplishments. Those with this orientation “set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion.”11 By contrast, the scriptures teach, those who labor “in Zion” must “labor for Zion.”12 Just as those in a Zion society must have the right shared purpose—or mind-set—they must also share the proper motivation—or heart. Those in the world are motivated by pride. They seek the “gain and praise of the world.” Those in a Zion society are motivated by charity, and “charity is love.”13 Their hearts are “knit together in unity and in love one towards another,”14 as our conference theme urges us to do. While we may not always view it that way, these two different motivations—pride and charity—are really exact polar opposites. We often think of humility as being the opposite of pride and hatred as being the opposite of charity. Yet as President Ezra Taft Benson has pointed out, “the central feature of pride is enmity—enmity toward God and enmity toward our fellowmen.”15 Enmity puts us in competition with others. We succeed only at their expense. This is the root cause of pride. As C. S. Lewis explained: Pride gets no pleasure out of having something, only out of having more of it than the next man. We say that people are proud of being rich, or clever, or good-looking, but they are not. They are proud of being richer, or cleverer, or better-looking than others. If everyone else became equally rich, or clever, or good-looking, there would be nothing to be proud about. It is the comparison that makes you proud: the pleasure of being above the rest.16 Enmity—or hatred of others—is the core of pride. The cure for pride is, therefore, the opposite of hatred: love or charity. Pride can be a powerful motivation, especially in the academic world. Rankings and ratings comparing us with our peers are the norm. Our challenge—the challenge of becoming a Zion university—is to be motivated by charity, or love, in our academic work. How do we do that? Fourteen years ago, when he was the academic vice president at BYU in Provo, now BYU–Hawaii president John S. Tanner shared a memorable verbal and visual description of what that might look like, using what he called a “professional pyramid,”17 with love at the center. He explained: I resolved that my professional life must remain founded on love rather than on fear of failure, devotion to duty, or even vaulting ambition. . . . Love of learning had drawn me to the academy and to BYU. I could not imagine a career here absent such passion.18 President Tanner then explained that this motivational love should be directed toward three principal objects. First is our field of study—in his case English. He said: I resolved to seize the expectation for scholarship not as an exercise in résumé building or hoop jumping but as an opportunity for deeper engagement with a subject I loved.19 Many of us can relate to this orientation. For many academics it is the love of ideas or the love of art and music that drew us to this career. It is what excites us; we love to learn about things that we find fascinating. We find beauty and meaning in that learning. Current examples of this passion—this love of subject matter—abound on this campus. Let me share just two of them, both the result of a BYU Magazine effort to capture a small portion of the excitement that the love of subject matter generates on campus. First is Professor Byron J. Adams from the BYU Department of Biology [a video was shown]: It is not a panda bear. You know, it is not a koala. It is not a puppy dog or a baby goat. It certainly is something that I think is absolutely beautiful. So the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica are the coldest, driest, windiest deserts on planet earth. We collected a bunch of samples from a landscape that looked like what could have been Mars. And the very first time I am looking, you know, through a microscope, I am not expecting to find much at all. Instead I see that the dish is full of these microscopic animals: Scottnema lindsayae. This nematode was named after Robert Falcon Scott—the dude who led the British Antarctic expeditions. First of all, I am stunned that there are living things in there. But under the microscope you can see all of these features. It has these little probolae, these little feeler things on top of its head that make it look like it is wearing this little crown. Then it has the annulations that go down the side of the body, producing a really beautiful pearl effect—sort of like the pearl paint jobs you might see on a hot rod car or something. I would say from that moment, Scottnema lindsayae and I, we bonded. It is a beautiful thing to look at, and it also tells a beautiful story about how these organisms can persist and survive in the harshest ecosystems on planet earth. To me, dude, that is just face melting, man. And I totally, totally dig it.20 Next is an example from Professor Renata T. Forste from the BYU Department of Sociology [a video was shown]: What is the best indicator of the well-being of a society? It is the status of its women and girls. For fifteen years of my academic career, I have studied maternal education and child health in the Altiplano in Bolivia. What I found was that even if a mother has nine years of education, the infant mortality rate is cut in half. Secondary-educated mothers have better nourished children, they are healthier, and those women have higher wages, which they then, in turn, turn around and invest in their children and their future. Even in the United States, college-educated women are more likely to marry. They marry more involved fathers, and they provide greater cognitive stimulation for their children. And they are even more likely to breastfeed their children than less-educated mothers. The benefits of education not only empower and bless the lives of women and girls but also the lives of men and boys. An educated girl can help strengthen her family and her community and help break the chains of poverty. Education matters, and that is why to me, a girl in school is a beautiful thing.21 It is easy to sense the love that these two faculty members have for their fields of study. The exact subject may vary—from microscopic Antarctic organisms to the power of educating girls—but the passion is the same. I trust that most of you can readily relate to how the love of a subject enriches and enhances your lives and work. The second object of President Tanner’s pyramid of love is the student: I loved my students. I loved to teach. Yes, some aspects of teaching are wearing and wrenching—like grading papers—but . . . I never cease to feel compelled by the faces of students eager to learn.22 At this point the pyramid seems to reflect the tension between teaching and research that is so familiar on every campus. We may often feel torn between spending time with students and spending time with our subjects, and many in the academic world would say that we have to choose to emphasize one over the other if we are truly to excel in either. However, the pyramid anticipates that we will bring the two together at a higher level, a level that amplifies both our love of learning and our love of students. As President Tanner noted, “BYU faculty should eschew false either/or thinking about teaching and research.”23 He also said: How can we love our subjects without wanting to share them with those who come to us to learn? Or [how can we] truly love our students without holding them accountable for knowing the subjects?24 Thus, at a Zion university, we ask you to bring the two together. One way of doing that is to directly involve students in our research or otherwise share with them our excitement and love for what we are doing in that realm. Again, examples abound on campus. Let me share just one, a video about a BYU holographic research project [a video was shown]: Erich Nygaard: Our group has a mission to take the 3-D displays of science fiction and make them real. Daniel Smalley: We started this project with the goal in mind of creating the Princess Leia projection. Nygaard: It is pretty much a dream project to be able to work on. It is exciting to work on things that have not been done before. Wesley Rogers: As a primarily undergraduate team doing this project, there is a big learning curve, right? It was something that has just never been done before. That was really the biggest struggle. We were taking science fiction and trying to bring it into the real world. Nygaard: And definitely it took a lot of patience and hard work—a lot of hours spent in a dark room with lasers trying to get things to work right. Rogers: As we got deeper and deeper into the project, you would google something and there was no answer. You would read research documents from around the world, and you would realize that nobody knew the answers and that you had to go find them. Smalley: We have created a display that is very much like the displays of science fiction. Nygaard: We are actually using a laser beam to trap a particle, and then we can move that particle and create the image. Smalley: This display is like a 3-D printer for light. You are actually printing an object in space with these little particles. The future won’t be the future without a Princess Leia projector, and this can make that a reality. Rogers: We have finally been able to culminate all those years of work into a publication in the journal Nature, which is one of the really prestigious journals. Nygaard: Right after we got published, we could see articles popping up on websites worldwide. BBC World News reporter: A team at Brigham Young University in America, who have used a color laser and dust particles to create images that float in the air . . . Rogers: Different news stations picking it up. It felt like it was everywhere. Smalley: I definitely believe all researchers need to have a quest. They need to identify something they really want to build or some group of people that they really want to help. And then that type of quest becomes a context for their education and for their work. And that is the foundation for making cool things happen. Nygaard: He [Smalley] is willing to kind of take risks on students, and he is also encouraging of exploring and setting your sights high. Undergraduates are definitely valued here, and there is a big focus on allowing undergraduates to get into research. And I think for me, that was really a big formative experience in my undergraduate education. Smalley: I think all inspiration comes from the same source of all good. I am not sure how much Heavenly Father cares about 3-dimensional imagery, but I appreciate that He values our personal voyages of discovery and that He wants to help us be successful.25 At the top of the pyramid is something that both elevates as well as balances and centers our love of students and our love of a subject. It is the most important factor of all in our quest for a Zion university: love of the Savior, including love of the truths of His restored gospel. Love of the Savior and the principles of His gospel can enrich and elevate both our love of the things we study and our love of the students we teach. Again, President Tanner elaborated: The gospel provided essential perspective on my discipline. . . . It also instilled in me the desire to diligently seek truth to become more like God, whose glory “is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth” (D&C 93:36).26 Love of the Savior and the truths of His restored gospel not only increases our love of our subjects of study but also increases our love for the students. As President Tanner added: [It helps us see] students for who they really are: . . . children of a Father in Heaven . . . needing to become more like Him on their journey home.27 This in turn can enrich and elevate our desire and ability to help our students learn essential truths about our subjects and about their divine potential. Our love for the Savior and His gospel can transform everything for us, including our ability to find both new insights and new ways to share those insights. Again, let me give one illustrative example, representative of so many on this campus, that demonstrates what it can look like when there is a love of subject, a love of students, and a reverence and love for God. This is a video featuring Professor Julie Crockett from the BYU Department of Mechanical Engineering [a video was shown]: I teach courses in fluid dynamics and thermodynamics, and I do research in that area as well. Personally, I enjoy being somewhat contemplative. So there was a particular tree outside of my house, and I loved to just climb up the tree, sit on a branch, just look around me, wonder what was going on around me, and think about the different things in the sky and the tree I was sitting in. My father was in the air force, so we got to see a lot of flybys—a lot of jet planes basically. I always thought it was amazing. You have this huge hunk of metal that is flying in the air. How is that even possible? I have always kind of felt like I didn’t quite know enough. I always wanted to know more. So I would learn how a plane flew, and that is great. But now I want to know, how can I make it even better? There was definitely a time a few years into my PhD program that I just wondered, “Do I know enough to do this?” I am supposed to be finding out something that no one else has ever done. I am supposed to be doing this completely new research and become an expert in an area that other people have been working in for thirty years. And it was hard. I thought, “I don’t know if I am smart enough to do this.” But it was like anything else: we have the capability to do anything we want to do. I love seeing other students love fluids as much as I do. I find it so fun, and there is always so much more to learn. And it is so enjoyable for me to see that in other students and to get them to say, “Wait a minute. Fluids. I was drinking water this morning, and that is a fluid. And part of it stuck on my cup. That is really weird. I wonder why it didn’t fall. I wonder if I used a glass cup if it would move differently.” Just little things like that where they start to see it in their everyday lives is so fun for me, because then I feel like, “Hey, they are catching this!” So one of the reasons that I chose BYU is because of the opportunity to be both a Saint and a scholar. If you are working hard, the Spirit will help bring forth to your mind an idea that doesn’t come from any of my background. It doesn’t come necessarily from any other learning that I have had. It is just a prompting from the Spirit to try something new or to try something different that might seem crazy and that I am sure is not something I could have come up with on my own. I also recognize that I have to put forth the effort to have the ability to understand those promptings, but I know that they are promptings from the Spirit. If you look at how aerodynamic things are shaped, like airplanes, and then look at something such as a bird or a fish or something that needs to be aerodynamic and needs to fly, what we have done as people is try to engineer things that look like nature—nature that our Heavenly Father created. And I love being able to make that connection in class, because then students start to look at nature differently as well and think, “This was ­engineered—by the best engineer ever.” Admittedly, I did still climb a tree just last week and sit up in the tree. It gave me the opportunity to pause and to have the time to feel the Spirit to help lead me forward toward my education and the interest in research I have now. I truly believe that a part of our gospel is education—and not just classic education as in book learning and going to class, but learning. We are all working toward becoming more like our Heavenly Father.28 A university shaped by the love of God, which in turn enhances the love of subject and the love of students, can become a Zion university, a university in which in this critical respect we are of one heart and one mind. As President Bateman explained: In our context, a Zion university is a community of righteous scholars and students searching for truth for the purpose of educating the whole person.29 And, I would add, it is a community motivated by charity, the pure love of Christ—both His love for us and our love for Him. Changing Lives in Powerful Ways Because it is based on unique principles, a Zion university will be different from other universities in many ways. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell once observed, “A unique Church deserves a unique university!”30 On some matters, we will have to rely on our own standards and measures because the world will not value—or sometimes even understand—the things that are central to our endeavor. But that, too, is additional evidence that we are on the right track, for modern-day scriptures make it clear that, in the long run, “the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion.”31 Thus we must be prepared to evaluate our work in new ways. I am grateful for the many conversations that have occurred in this past year about how to describe, encourage, and incentivize student-centered research in all of our disciplines. That is a Zion-like effort. We must be careful, however, that our search for new standards does not cause us to do less than our best work. Being unique does not excuse us from producing world-class scholarship and creative works. I wholeheartedly join Elder Maxwell, who stated that his expectations for this institution . . . [included] not only teaching “out of the best books,” but also having its faculty and graduates write some of the best books! Likewise, not only are BYU’s students to be helped to appreciate and to enjoy great music, but they and some of the faculty and graduates are to compose some of it!32 As Elder Maxwell also observed, “Only an excellent university can really help the Church much. Mediocrity won’t do either academically or spiritually.”33 Loving our students, loving our subjects, and loving the Savior are not tasks that are limited to faculty members. Everyone on campus has a role to play in creating this Zion-like community. An exhibit in the Education in Zion gallery in the Joseph F. Smith Building describes one example. It tells the story of Delbert Brigham Brown, who “grew up in Mexico as a rough-edged rancher and farmer.”34 He was not particularly active in the Church. As his life changed, he moved his family to Provo so his children could attend BYU, where he gained employment as the custodian of the Smith Fieldhouse. In that setting, “he became the confidant and counselor of many students,”35 some of whom worked for him and some who did not. The exhibit describes several instances in which Brother Brown taught, mentored, and loved the students. I share just two. One day Delbert found a purse containing cigarettes and a gold lighter. The young woman who came to claim it wept when he told her the story of a young man who “took up with some [bad] habits” but with help overcame them; it was . . . his own story in disguise. Delbert told her that she could have “the cream of the campus” for her friends and future husband, if she would only try. About three years later, following a devotional, a young woman asked him if he remembered the girl with the cigarettes. “I am that girl,” she said, “and I am going to be married in the temple next month.”36 On another occasion, at a time when registration for classes at BYU took place in the Smith Fieldhouse, [an international student who had come to BYU from the Middle East] stepped into Delbert’s small office [during registration with a question]. “What does one do when . . . his money is all gone and he finds out he is short ten dollars for a class . . . that he has to have?” Delbert later wrote, “As I looked at that young fellow, I thought, ‘How many thousand miles away from . . . home are you . . . ? Just who can you turn to?’ And so I said, ‘Well, I guess you will just have to find a friend. . . .’ And he said, ‘I have no friend. I know [nobody].’ . . . I took out . . . a ten-dollar bill . . . ([even though] I never carry that kind of money) and handed it to him. He . . . said, ‘Why do you do this? You don’t even know my name.’ And I simply gave him the [only] answer I had: ‘. . . All students at [BYU] are my friends.’”37 Persons filled with the love of Christ can teach and change lives in powerful ways, no matter what other specific roles they play. Keeping Our Professional Pyramid in Balance To achieve our goal to create the unique combination of love of student, love of subject, and love of the Savior that creates a Zion-like atmosphere, we will all likely need to change—to repent, if you will. We will all likely need to view things a little differently than we have before—maybe even reorient ourselves a bit. We may have to go through the kind of experience that J. Reuben Clark Jr. did. Most of us know J. Reuben Clark Jr. as a faithful member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who served as a member of the First Presidency for nearly three decades. Many will also be familiar with a number of his key teachings, which continue to resonate in the hearts and souls of many in the Church today, including this oft-quoted observation: In the service of the Lord, it is not where you serve but how. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one takes the place to which one is duly called, which place one neither seeks nor declines.38 In part because our law school bears his name, many will also recognize that President Clark was an outstanding lawyer before he began his service as a member of the First Presidency. There is a great lesson to be learned from his transition from his secular legal and diplomatic work to his Church work, a lesson that is both helpful in understanding President Clark’s teaching on how we respond to callings in the Church and illuminating in the kind of hearts—and humility—we must have if we are to be fully successful in our efforts to build and advance the cause of Zion on this campus. A bit of background and biography provides both context for the main point as well as a few intervening lessons of their own. J. Reuben Clark Jr. grew up in the small community of Grantsville, Utah. From an early age he demonstrated a deep love of learning. He attended the eighth grade in Grantsville three times—not because he was a slow learner but because he loved learning, and eighth grade was the highest grade available in that small community at that time. He went back because he wanted to learn as much as he could, even if it meant repeating the subjects he had studied before.39 An insight into the depth of his love for learning, and how early in his life it was manifested, comes from three entries in the journal of Reuben’s father, Joshua—entries made in the middle of the winter of 1884, when Reuben was twelve years old: Monday A very stormy morning. Snowing and the wind blowing from the north. Snow drifting. We advised the children not to go to school. Reuben thought he could stand it and so went. Edwin and Elmer remained at home. Tuesday A bitter cold morning. I think that we are now having the coldest weather that I ever experienced in the month of February. The boys started to school this morning, but it was so cold and stormy that we called . . . them back. Reuben had got out of hearing. Edwin and Elmer remained at home. Wednesday The weather was extremely cold last night and this morning. . . . We thought it was too cold to send Edwin and Elmer to school today, but Reuben would rather miss his meals than to miss a day from school.40 That is love of learning. At age nineteen, Reuben made his way to Salt Lake City, seeking to go beyond his eighth-grade education. He enrolled at what was then called the LDS College. But during his first semester, he caught the attention of the principal, James E. Talmage, who offered him a job working full-time at the new Deseret Museum, where Talmage had just been appointed curator.41 Reuben dropped out of school and took the job. Four years later, Talmage was named president of the University of Utah, and the museum and Reuben went with him. Needing to support his father’s missionary service, Reuben continued working full-time,42 yet he graduated as valedictorian of his graduating class. Shortly thereafter, at the age of twenty-seven, Reuben married Luacine Savage. They moved to Heber City, where Reuben had accepted a job teaching at the new high school in town. Reuben taught school in various places in Utah for the next five years, but he felt early on that there was more to learn both academically and professionally. Over time he developed an interest in the law, but with a wife and a daughter to support, law school attendance seemed out of the question. When a generous benefactor offered to pay for law school, Reuben, Luacine, and their family headed off to New York City so that, at the age of thirty-two, Reuben could study law at Columbia University. Reuben’s love for learning and his penchant for hard work quickly manifested themselves in law school. As described by one biographer: When given an assignment [in law school, Reuben] did far more than brief a case or two in the customary fashion; he hounded the errant problem back into its past, rooting through precedents, commentaries, ancillary discussions, and anything else he could find. Then, amid a chaos of notes, citations, and open books piled high, he observed step by step how the matter had come into being. It was a principle of life as well as a principle of law, he concluded, that one knew what to do next only when one knew what had gone before.43 Reuben loved learning deeply. He was clearly in his element, and he was flourishing. Luacine, not so much. Although she and Reuben loved each other deeply, she missed her family and Salt Lake City. Again, in the words of Reuben’s biographer: Her two young daughters were more than a handful. Her husband was scarcely ever home. . . . Recreation was virtually nonexistent. Luacine kept a calendar and drew X’s across it as the weeks passed by. She was like a prisoner awaiting parole.44 One gets the sense from this and other incidents that Reuben’s love for learning at times left him a bit unbalanced, despite his deep love for Luacine. While the plans were to return to Salt Lake City after law school, those plans changed when Reuben received an offer from one of his professors who had just been appointed solicitor for the State Department. The professor asked Reuben to serve as assistant solicitor—a job out of law school that few could dream of and one that was too good for one who loved the law to pass up. So the Clarks moved to Washington, DC, for what they thought would be a few years’ stint. Luacine traveled with the children to Utah every summer, hoping that Reuben would someday accompany them permanently. However, Reuben’s success soon brought other opportunities that were also too good to pass up, in his view. In the third summer, Luacine could see the writing on the wall, and she wrote to Reuben from Salt Lake City: “It is needless for me to say how I dislike living in Washington . . . , but if you intend to live on there, I will go just as soon as the weather will permit.”45 Again, one wonders if Reuben’s love for learning and the joy that he derived from that caused him to pay less attention to other things he loved— a mistake that some of us may make if we do not keep all aspects of our professional pyramid in balance. Several months later, Reuben was jolted when Luacine fell ill. For a few hours she literally hovered between life and death. Something about that event changed Reuben, as he realized the anchor that Luacine was in his life, and he began to bring more balance to his life. As his biographer noted, “His days at the office grew perceptibly shorter, while evenings at home lengthened. He learned, in fact, to do much of his work in a private study upstairs, . . . [sometimes with] his infant son propped on the desk.”46 As a result of his increasingly balanced focus, Reuben and Luacine came closer to an agreement as to their situation, and Reuben flourished even more. A few years later, Reuben resigned from the State Department, where he had eventually served as the solicitor, and he started up a private law practice in Washington, DC. He eventually opened a second office in New York City and then one in Salt Lake City, where he returned more permanently in 1923 at the age of fifty-two. Because of his love of learning and his love for his wife and family, Reuben made a deep and important impact on the lives of many. During his time back East, he in many ways connected the Church back to the rest of America. In the eyes of most Americans at the time, members of the Church of Jesus Christ were oddities, if not outcasts. Reuben arrived in Washington in the midst of the Smoot hearings, when Congress was seriously debating whether a leader in the Church was fit to serve as a senator. Yet Reuben was so bright and so good that people kept coming to him for advice and with requests for service, even after he had returned to Utah. In 1928, President Calvin Coolidge appointed him as undersecretary of state, and in 1930, Reuben was appointed as the U.S. ambassador to Mexico. At the time of his appointment as ambassador, this was one of the premier and most sensitive State Department appointments. Given that important position, it would have been natural to think that Reuben had reached the summit of his life’s work—one in which his love of learning and his love for his wife and family had led him to his life’s purpose. At the end of his book entitled J. Reuben Clark: The Public Years, author Frank W. Fox described a scene at the embassy in Mexico that summed up what J. Reuben Clark’s life looked like at this stage of his career: It was . . . an early evening at the embassy in the twilight of autumn. The Clarks were preparing to entertain. Servants were still bustling around starchily. . . . Reuben, resplendent in his Prince Albert, had paused in the [hall] to fumble with an errant cufflink when he looked through the vaulted archway to see what he described as an apparition. It was Luacine Savage Clark, standing in a floor-length blue gown, arranging some . . . lilies on the piano—easily at that moment the most beautiful woman on earth. This, Reuben told himself, was it. For this he had slaved and sacrificed his entire life. For this he had gone to the Grantsville eighth grade over and over again, and then to the university, and then to Columbia law school, and then to the State Department. This was the dream that lay behind those endless pilgrimages back and forth across the continent, that had taken him in and out of public service, in and out of private practice, up and down through boom and bust. . . . Here was the imposing mansion. Here was the well-stocked library with its crackling hearth. Here was the man of account and here were people coming to honor him. And here, vastly more important than all else, was the woman whose sacrifice, whose gallantry, whose quiet self-abnegation had made it all possible.47 It seemed at this point that J. Reuben Clark in his early sixties had arrived at what was his life’s calling. It all made sense. But even though he was in his sixties, Reuben’s life course was about to change dramatically—precipitated by the passing in December 1931 of Charles W. Nibley, second counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. Later that month, two of the Clarks’ daughters were visiting their parents in Mexico just before Christmas. As one of them searched through the day’s mail, she noticed a letter from the First Presidency. Jokingly, Louise said to her father, “It’s for you from President Grant. . . . He is probably asking you to be his counselor.”48 The entire family joined in the laughter. Reuben had never been a stake president; he had never been a bishop. He was not even a high priest. He seemed one of the most unlikely choices for such service. So everyone laughed—except Reuben. He took the letter, put it in his coat pocket, and, “when conversation seemed to lag, he excused himself, went to his study, and locked the door.”49 Reuben read the letter. It opened by noting President Nibley’s death and then stated, “After prayerful consideration our minds definitely revert to you as the man whom the Lord desires to fill this vacancy.”50 This was a bolt out of the blue for Reuben. After regaining his composure, he drafted not a letter but what he entitled a “Memorandum of Explanation.” In it, Reuben explained the nature of his current assignment as ambassador, the fact that there were sensitive ongoing negotiations with Mexico, and his fears that President Herbert Hoover and Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson might consider him a deserter if he resigned at that time. He then wrote a cover letter that stated: You Brethren must have an enormous amount of work and be in need of help, so much so that you will not care to postpone filling the vacancy for an indefinite time. . . . I can conceive that, if you think it best not to give opportunity for irritation [to President Hoover and Secretary Stimson] through my leaving before they desire it, you may wish—instead of waiting for me—to fill the vacancy by appointing some one else. If you take this view, I hope you will feel entirely free to act.51 As another of President Clark’s biographers explained: It was a supreme example of J. Reuben Clark’s diplomacy: he had not actually declined the invitation to become a counselor in the First Presidency, in fact, he had even expressed gratitude for their confidence in him, but he had presented the situation in terms that would probably lead President Grant to choose another man as counselor rather than wait for Ambassador Clark to complete his work in Mexico.52 Reuben did not send the memorandum at that time. He took the memorandum and cover letter and left them in a locked drawer. He then joined the family for Christmas Eve celebrations without informing them of the contents of the letter. A few days later, Reuben took the papers from the drawer, reread them, and wrote a different letter to the First Presidency—one that contained echoes of his later teaching about accepting callings and serving in the Church: I have never aspired to Church office—its honor and dignity I appreciated, but its responsibilities seemed too grave. I do not now so aspire. . . . But when, as now, a call comes from my superior officers, . . . acting under the inspiration of the Lord, then I, responsive to my training and my faith, must answer to the call, not only as a clear duty but as a great privilege. It is for the Lord to say how and where I shall serve. I trust Him to help me meet the responsibilities of my task.53 In the words of Clark biographer D. Michael Quinn, “This letter was from [Reuben’s] heart. . . . The other letter and memorandum were from his head and the lifelong strivings to succeed in a world that could not comprehend him.”54 Reuben’s heart prevailed over his head. Prior to his call as a member of the First Presidency, J. Reuben Clark had accomplished much in his life, propelled forward by his love of learning and his love of his spouse and family. Over time he flourished even more as he properly balanced those two loves. However, even though he thought he had accomplished all he could, he suddenly found a new level of success, a new kind of challenge—one that transformed what he thought were his prior accomplishments into mere preparation for greater things that were to come, as he came to see his life work in an entirely new way. As he focused on the top of the pyramid—on his love of the Savior—everything appeared in a new light. Now, none of us are likely to have as dramatic a paradigm shift as J. Reuben Clark experienced, but if we are to not only fit into but help create a more Zion-like university, all of us will need to view our careers more with our hearts—filled with love, including the love of God—and a little less with strivings to succeed in a world that may not comprehend us. This is not a simple task. It requires not only that we collectively be of one heart and one mind but also that our hearts be pure. “For this is Zion—the pure in heart.”55 We will each need to change to some degree; we will each need to be better. We will each need to work harder. We will each need to be more spiritual. But the good news of the gospel is that we can change, we can improve, and we can become better, holier people. And as we do so, our efforts will inspire and improve those around us. This is the purpose of our mortal experience. Thus, as we strive to become a Zion university, we will be fulfilling our essential mission to assist individuals—others around us and ourselves included—in our quest for perfection and eternal life. I love this university. I love the cause in which it allows us to be engaged. And I love you. I believe with all my heart that as we orient our minds and hearts toward the Lord, as we knit our hearts together in love, and as we make our hearts pure, we will be part of the effort that will cause Zion to be “far ahead of the outside world in everything pertaining to learning of every kind.” May that be our destiny is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> In short, our end goal in this effort is to create “a community of belonging” and “an environment of belonging” in which each member is valued and all realize their divine potential as children of God. What a wonderful sight it is to see us gathered together again on this campus. Like any culture, academia has its own distinct idiosyncrasies that seem natural to its members but that might strike an outsider as a bit odd. For example, at this and at many universities, we annually celebrate the start of a new year in August, even though there are more than four months left on our calendars. And while January is still nearly half a year away, we look, in Janus-like fashion, to both the past and the future. To us, it just seems normal to pause in August to celebrate our successes, move on from our failures, and renew our commitment to the causes in which we are engaged. It has been, to say the least, a most unusual academic year, and unfortunately the ongoing effects of the pandemic continue to affect our planning and efforts. We are pleased that due to the vaccination efforts of those in our university community, we can offer more of the blessings of a traditional BYU experience than we did last year. Yet that optimism is still tempered by the continuing presence and vagaries of the coronavirus, so we must remain vigilant and flexible. The good news is that during the past year we showed that we can not only survive but also thrive in an uncertain and quickly changing environment. From academic awards in many departments to athletic successes in numerous sports and from remarkable students serving one another to extraordinary efforts of academic support units both in altering their services and in accelerating the completion of numerous projects, this campus community has shown this last year that it can flourish in the midst of adversity. I am also pleased with how thoroughly and thoughtfully all parts of the university have focused on and incorporated into their plans the university five-year strategic plan. The alignment that is occurring was very clear during our recent round of strategic resource planning. That alignment will be a great benefit to us in this coming year as we anticipate a site visit from the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities in April—something you will all be invited to participate in next semester. A Daunting yet Exciting Challenge Reflecting our Janus-like midyear pause, I want to frame my vision for the future year by turning to the past, focusing initially on the events of one particular day at BYU: October 10, 1975—a day that forever changed the trajectory of my life and career. The occasion was the Founders Day convocation celebrating the centennial anniversary of the founding of BYU. President Spencer W. Kimball was on campus to dedicate the Carillon Tower and Bells, which had been constructed to commemorate the centennial. It was a memorable day for all involved. However, at the time I didn’t know that any of this was happening. I was not in Provo on October 10, 1975. Nor was I a BYU student at the time. I had attended another college the year before and was, on that day, in Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico, serving in the first area of my mission. Yet even though I was completely unaware of—and frankly uninterested in—what was happening in Provo at the time, what happened here that day greatly shaped my future. The connecting link came almost three and a half years later, in the spring of 1979. I had finished my mission, transferred to BYU, and was about to graduate. I knew I wanted to go to law school, but I was not sure which law school I should attend. BYU was on my list, but I was still undecided when I walked into the Harold B. Lee Library on that spring day. As I was wandering in what was then the periodicals section of the library, I came across a copy of the speech that President Kimball gave at the centennial celebration on October 10, 1975.1 It is now known as the second-century address because it outlines President Kimball’s prophetic vision of what could happen at BYU in its second century. President Kimball described his vision that BYU would become an “educational Everest,”2 a place where things would be done in a way and at a level unlike anywhere else in the world, a place that would provide an “education for eternity,”3 and a place where faculty and students would help roll “back the frontiers of knowledge” while still being grounded in “the vital and revealed truths that have been sent to us from heaven.”4 President Kimball repeatedly emphasized that this higher view would require that we ­deviate from established norms or patterns in some respects. But he also made it clear that this did not give us an excuse for being mediocre or second-rate. Instead, this higher view required that we do more than others. President Kimball put it this way: Your light must have a special glow, for while you will do many things in the programs of this university that are done elsewhere, these same things can and must be done better here than others do them. You will also do some special things here that are left undone by other institutions.5 His was not a call to flee the world but to engage it on our own terms, with the goal of improving the world. As I read the talk, I experienced what I now call “revelation in the Lee Library.” I wanted to be part of what President Kimball described, and I knew for that reason that this was where I should go to law school. I wanted to go to a place where a commitment to excellence is expected and where we could do some traditional things as well as and even better than others while also attending to even more important matters. I did not envision at the time that that decision would lead me back to BYU as a faculty member eight years later or to my current position as president, but it did. Over the years, the impact from reading that speech and my appreciation for the motivating power of President Kimball’s vision have only increased. I find myself going back to it—and the mission statement that largely grew out of it—over and over again, discovering that, like scripture, it contains new insights with each reading, despite my previous familiarity with it. My most recent experience in that regard was prompted by an address given by Elder David A. Bednar at the President’s Leadership Summit this past April here at BYU.6 As part of those remarks, Elder Bednar shared his memory of hearing President Kimball’s address. Unlike me, Elder Bednar was actually present at the devotional that day as a recently married senior student at BYU. Elder Bednar described President Kimball’s talk as “inspiring, edifying, and prophetic.”7 He then noted that “we are approaching the halfway mark of the second century of BYU,” stating that this would be a good “time to consider where we are and what may be coming next.”8 Rather than elaborating on one particular theme, Elder Bednar read six different statements from President Kimball’s second-century address, providing no commentary to those quotations but inviting those present “to consider how these [statements] apply to both individuals and the institution.”9 While consideration of each of these statements is worthwhile, I was struck by one in particular—the last of the six that Elder Bednar shared. In that quotation, President Kimball stated: Gospel methodology, concepts, and insights can help us to do what the world cannot do in its own frame of reference. In some ways the Church Educational System, in order to be unique in the years that lie ahead, may have to break with certain patterns of the educational establishment. When the world has lost its way on matters of principle, we have an obligation to point the way.10 Two things from this quotation struck me in particular. First, we have “an obligation” to share our own unique insights with the world, because we have something unique to offer the world. Second, we can best meet that obligation by introducing “gospel methodology, concepts, and insights” into the frame of reference. That is a daunting yet exciting challenge. Striving to Create a Community of Belonging Let me provide some thoughts about what this might look like, using as an example the challenges BYU and the rest of the United States are facing with respect to racism and other forms of bigotry in our society. As you know, in response to the joint call of President Russell M. Nelson and leaders of the NAACP for “educational leaders . . . to review processes . . . and organizational attitudes regarding racism and root them out once and for all,”11 we appointed a committee, which after extensive work produced a report and recommendations of steps to be taken. I am extremely grateful to the members of the Committee on Race, Equity, and Belonging who have given so much of their time, their talents, and their hearts in that effort. As the President’s Council carefully and thoroughly considered the committee’s report and recommendations, we determined that a necessary first step was to establish a framework within which and by which we would evaluate the various recommendations. The framework would not only provide guiding principles for evaluating the recommendations and for measuring our progress but would also set forth a vision of our end goal—what we hoped our campus community would become as a result of this effort. The resulting statement describing this framework is in substance, source, and tone different from the typical kinds of diversity statements one might find on most campuses. It is infused, to use President Kimball’s terms, in “gospel methodology, concepts, and insights.” The statement begins: “We are united by our common primary identity as children of God . . . and our commitment to the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.”12 Notice that the statement begins with what unites us, not what divides us. More important, note that it begins with a fundamental gospel truth—maybe the core gospel truth—about our identity. In a world of identity politics, we cannot lose sight of who we really are.13 And knowing who we really are—and who everyone else is—changes the frame of reference for addressing this important issue. Note also the scriptural references for that and for many of the other statements in the document. Reliance on the eternal, unchanging truths found in these scriptures will ensure both that the principles will remain relevant and that we do not unwittingly drift away from those truths as circumstances change. And note finally that we are united not only by our common eternal identity but also by our covenant commitment to the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. With these key gospel truths as a foundation, “we strive to create a community of belonging composed of students, faculty, and staff whose hearts are knit together in love.”14 This is an effort to build a particular kind of community, a community of belonging involving everyone: students, faculty, and staff. It is a relationship-based community defined by how we view and interact with others—one so infused with love and concern for others that it feels as though our hearts are knit together. Note again the scriptural grounding of this principle. As a result of having our hearts knit together, the community is one in which “all ­relationships”—not just the relationships with those with whom we agree but all relationships—“reflect devout love of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor.”15 It is a community in which we strive to live the two great commandments. “We value and embrace”—not just tolerate but value and embrace—“the variety of individual characteristics, life experiences and circumstances, perspectives, talents, and gifts of each member of the community and the richness and strength they bring to our community.”16 The scripture reference here is of particular significance. In teaching this concept to the ancient Corinthians, Paul likened those in the community to different parts of the body. Each is distinct from the others, each has a role to play, and each role is significant. But all are part of “the body of Christ,”17 united by Him in such a way that when one suffers, all suffer, and when one is honored, all rejoice.18 In the community we are striving to establish, “our interactions create and support an environment of belonging,”19 one in which, as the scripture reference makes clear, there “are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints.”20 Finally, there is a reminder that the core focus and central purpose for this effort and the reason for our existence as a university is, as our mission statement makes clear, “the full realization of each student’s divine potential.”21 In short, our end goal in this effort is to create “a community of belonging” and “an environment of belonging” in which each member is valued and all realize their divine potential as children of God. This statement on belonging will provide the constitution, if you will, for our efforts in this regard. It is derived from and grounded in gospel concepts and insights, including fundamental scriptural truths. As I noted, it will provide guiding principles for evaluating and implementing the recommendations provided by the Committee on Race, Equity, and Belonging. But it will also be the guide for addressing the needs of all marginalized individuals on campus. In that regard, I am pleased to announce the forthcoming creation of a new Office of Belonging on campus. The office will focus on helping campus members achieve the community of belonging outlined in the BYU Statement on Belonging, using the guiding principles it sets forth. The office will not only be core to our efforts to root out racism but will also help us combat “prejudice of any kind,” including that “based on race, ethnicity, nationality, tribe, gender, age, disability, socioeconomic status, religious belief . . . , and sexual orientation.”22 The office will focus primarily on coordinating and enhancing belonging services and efforts on campus, including through providing subject matter expertise and ideas. It will be headed by a vice-president-level official who will be a member of the President’s Council. Details about the new office and further responses to the other recommendations will be announced in the future. Counseling with Councils This unique approach to addressing one of the most pressing issues facing all universities is, for me, an example—and possible fulfillment—of President Kimball’s prophetic declaration that “gospel methodology, concepts, and insights can help us to do what the world cannot do in its own frame of reference.” An equally powerful though much less visible fulfillment of that declaration is found in the process by which this statement on belonging was created. This statement is the result of extensive discussion and counseling by the President’s Council at BYU. That council in turn also counseled with other “councils,” including not only the Committee on Race, Equity, and Belonging but also leadership councils of the university and even of the Church. In short, it is a product of counseling with councils. Early on in my BYU career, a member of an external evaluation team observed that BYU was big on councils. He was right. We don’t have a faculty senate; we have a faculty advisory council. We don’t have a student union; we have a student advisory council. We have an administrative advisory council, a dean’s council, an athletic advisory council, and on and on and on. Over time it has dawned on me that this distinctive feature reflects not just a unique nomenclature but a vastly underrated and underutilized gospel principle about how key decisions can be made in ways that ­produce both sound conclusions and individual growth. A recent series of articles and podcasts in the Church News highlighted that, as President M. Russell Ballard noted, counseling with councils “is ‘critical’ to the Church’s organization at every level”23 and is the way God has done His work from the very beginning. The use of councils is not just a good management practice; it is a heaven-utilized eternal process.24 Successful councils increase the sources of input needed to make sound decisions.25 They also produce more buy-in, thereby increasing the enthusiasm and support for the decision and for subsequent implementation. At the same time, individual members of the council develop a greater understanding of their own potential and worth and a better comprehension of their stewardship. President Dallin H. Oaks has observed that the key factor to realizing these and other benefits of councils is the inspired revelation that comes from the proper use of councils. He stated, “Revelation is the ultimate objective of the council—either revelation in the council, revelation to participants, or revelation to presiding officers.”26 As Young Women general president Bonnie H. Cordon observed, “As we seek to know [God’s] will, as men and women come together, listening to each other and listening to the Spirit, revelation flows.”27 Let me testify that I have felt that spirit of revelation as I have participated in councils concerning our efforts to increase belonging on this campus. I have felt that same spirit of revelation and comfort as we have counseled and continue to counsel about the ongoing pandemic. That is not to suggest that the BYU Statement on Belonging is destined to become canonized scripture or that every decision we have made or will make to address the ongoing twists and turns of the COVID-19 pandemic are divinely inspired. But I have seen and felt enough of those feelings in both of those settings that I cannot deny that God is interested and involved in the work of this university and that His influence can be enhanced by the proper use of councils. With that in mind, let me suggest that we could all benefit—individually and institutionally—by viewing and operating our “committee” work as councils, whose primary purpose is, as President Oaks observed, to produce revelation—­revelation to the council, to the individual participants, and to the presiding authority. If we were to view every committee assignment—from more foundational hiring committees to ad hoc party planning committees—as a revelation-inviting counseling opportunity, it would change the tenor of the decisions and might change mundane meetings into sublime, uplifting spiritual-growth opportunities.28 Contention Is Incompatible with Belonging Now, underlying both the substance of the BYU Statement on Belonging and the power of the counseling process that produced it is one other key gospel concept that often is overlooked by the world, especially today—the revealed, eternal principle taught directly by the Savior Himself that contention is of the devil and must be avoided.29 Contention will undermine any effort to create a belonging community in which our hearts are knit together. It is significant that the Book of Mormon passage in which Alma exhorted his ­people to “hav[e] their hearts knit together” begins by noting that Alma “commanded them that there should be no contention one with another.”30 Contention is simply incompatible with belonging. Similarly, contention will destroy any effort to invite or produce revelation in any council setting. Contention is simply incompatible with the presence of the Spirit. As Jesus taught, “He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention.”31 It does not matter what or how important the subject is—whether it is race relations, mask or vaccine protocols, or which football team is the best—contention is still soul destroying, for it is Satan who “stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another.”32 The topic may involve something as essential as the proper mode of baptism—which was the subject that prompted the contention that Jesus rebuked in 3 Nephi 11—but contention is still not justified, and Jesus still commands “that such things should be done away.”33 Now, I am not saying that we can’t address, ­vigorously discuss, or fundamentally disagree with each other on important topics. Eliminating such discussions would undermine both the purpose of having a university and the power of councils. But I am saying that even in those settings, we cannot afford to contend in anger one with another.34 I realize that we cannot control how contentious other people are. But we must avoid it ourselves. As Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf taught us so powerfully last week, “Conflict is inevitable and contention is a choice.”35 When we find ourselves becoming contentious, we should stop—and, if necessary, disengage. No matter what the topic or how strongly we believe it to be essential, contention will destroy any community in which it flourishes and injure the eternal spirit and progress of any individual who engages in it. I am now ashamed to admit that it took more than one Bible-bashing experience as a young missionary for me to realize that no matter how much I was right and no matter how important the topic, the Spirit of the Lord flees when we become contentious. I have discovered that for me, an indicator that I am becoming contentious is when I find myself more interested in who is right than what is right. When my ­primary goal is to vindicate my own position or prove another wrong rather than to find the truth from whatever source it may come, I know the spirit of contention is soon to follow. If we truly want to be a Zion-like belonging community in which councils facilitate revelation, we must avoid contention. That can be a daunting challenge in the highly polarized environment in which we find ourselves, but, as with all gospel commandments, the challenge comes accompanied by an unfailing promise of divine help necessary for the moment if our hearts are open.36 Prophetic Expectations Now, even though I was not present when President Kimball gave that stirring address nearly fifty years ago, technology as well as the Spirit allow me to have a sense of what it was like to be there hearing his voice and, moreover, to consider some ways in which his vision has been and is being fulfilled around us every day. So, as I conclude, join me in a bit of reflection on the words of President Kimball and the way in which his vision is being realized all around us. As you do so, pay particular attention to his final words about his expectations: Your light must have a special glow, for while you will do many things in the programs of this university that are done elsewhere, these same things can and must be done better here than others do them. You will also do some special things here that are left undone by other institutions. First among these unique features is the fact that education on this campus deliberately and persistently concerns itself with “education for eternity,” not just for time. . . . Your double heritage and dual concerns with the ­secular and the spiritual require you to be “bilingual.” . . . . . . Quality teaching is a tradition never to be abandoned. . . . . . . BYU . . . must concern itself . . . with the preparation of its students to take their place in society as thinking, thoughtful, and sensitive individuals who, in paraphrasing the motto of your centennial, come here dedicated to love of God, pursuit of truth, and service to mankind. . . . . . . Gospel methodology, concepts, and insights can help us to do what the world cannot do in its own frame of reference. . . . . . . We understand, as few people do, that education is a part of being about our Father’s business. . . . As previous First Presidencies have said, and we say again to you, we expect (we do not simply hope) that Brigham Young University will “become a leader among the great universities of the world.” To that expectation I would add, “Become a unique university in all of the world!”37 Those stirring concluding words about ­prophetic expectations have become emblazoned on my soul these past few years. President Kimball used almost those same words five years later at the inauguration of Elder Jeffrey R. Holland as president of this university. However, in that setting, President Kimball changed one word and added one significant sentence. He said: As previous First Presidencies have said, we say again to you: “We expect—we do not merely hope—that Brigham Young University will become a leader among the great universities of the world.” To that expectation I would add, “Remain a unique university in all the world!” Then, in the process of time, this truly will become the fully recognized university of the Lord about which so much has been spoken in the past.38 I do not know what happened in the five-year interval between his second-century address and President Holland’s inauguration that led President Kimball to change the focus of his charge from “becoming” to “remaining” a unique university. But I am certain that he saw that remaining a unique university would be the key to realizing our ultimate destiny as “the fully recognized university of the Lord about which so much has been spoken.” That is our prophetically declared future. I love you and I bear my witness that that future is ­possible—indeed, inevitable. May we all be blessed to be a part of that soul-stretching, soul-stirring endeavor is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> You are not here by accident. God has a work to perform through you. Make Him the center of your efforts. Do what He would want you to do. Let His light shine more brightly through you as a result of your experiences at BYU. Welcome to the start of a new semester. We are so glad to have you students here on campus. Our community comes alive in a new way because you are here. Most of our new students arrived two weeks ago. Many of them participated in what is now becoming a tradition: forming the Y at LaVell Edwards Stadium. This is a wonderful and symbolic reminder that you, the students, are the Y—meaning that you are both the reason why we exist as a university and, for those with whom you interact, the embodiment of what BYU stands for. You represent the Y wherever you go. I love this recent tradition. There is another BYU tradition, one that began long before any of you were born. In 1924, students hiked up to the block Y on Y Mountain, dipped mattress stuffing in oil, placed the mattress balls around the edges of the Y, and lit them with torches they had carried up the ­mountain—thus lighting the Y for the very first time. Since that time the Y has been lighted every year for Homecoming, graduation, and other special events. Fortunately the torch fires never spread to the rest of the mountain in the ensuing decades. By the 1980s, those involved decided not to tempt fate any longer, and the mattress balls and torches were replaced with a generator and a string of lightbulbs stretched around the Y, making the Y brilliantly visible throughout the valley. This past summer, permanent lighting was literally cemented in place, and new technology was installed to allow remote lighting, thereby ensuring that the tradition of lighting the Y will continue for years to come. Just as I hope that the more recent tradition of forming the Y in LaVell Edwards Stadium reminds you that you are the Y, I hope that the continuation of the long-standing tradition of lighting the Y reminds you of an invitation that I will give to each of you students today: Don’t just light the Y; let the Y light you. What do I mean by that? Perhaps it can best be explained by a familiar story told by President James E. Faust. In the 1980s, prior to his becoming a member of the First Presidency, President Faust worked alongside many others to establish the BYU Jerusalem Center. In a 2005 general conference address, President Faust recalled one historic meeting regarding the lease for the land on which the . . . Jerusalem Center . . . was later built. Before this lease could be signed, President Ezra Taft Benson and Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, then president of Brigham Young University, agreed with the Israeli government on behalf of the Church and the university not to proselyte in Israel. President Faust then said: To our knowledge the Church and BYU have scrupulously and honorably kept that nonproselyting commitment. After the lease had been signed, [however,] one of our [Israeli] friends insightfully remarked, “Oh, we know that you are not going to proselyte, but what are you going to do about the light that is in their eyes?” He was referring to our students who were studying in Israel.1 In other words, he was referring to you. More than you may recognize, you carry with you a light—a light that others notice. You brought much of that light with you to BYU, thanks to your parents, your friends, your teachers, and the good choices you have made in your life up until now. My invitation to you today is that you enhance that light during your experience at BYU—or, more precisely, that you enhance that light because of your experience at BYU. My ­invitation is for you to let the Y light you. Let the Y Light You How can you do that? Let me provide four suggestions, confident that if you apply them, you will receive further individualized insights through personal revelation. Recognize the Source and the Purpose of the Light First, and most important, you need to recognize the source of the light and the purpose for which it is given to you. The Lord clearly identified the source of the light in the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 93:2, saying, “I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” In the words of Doctrine and Covenants 88:13, the Lord is “the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things,” including what President Faust described as the light that “shows in our countenances as well as in our eyes.”2 The more our thoughts and actions align with the Lord’s, the more we serve and love others as He does, the more His light will shine in us. If we take time each day to reflect on what Christ would have us do, He will use our experiences at BYU to enhance that light in us. The reason the Lord provides that light to you is not just to help you but also to help you help others. In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ said, “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven” (Matthew 5:16). Gaining light by your experiences at BYU will help you progress eternally and bring you peace and joy in this life. However, being lighted by the Y is not a selfish endeavor. The light is not given to you for your glory. It is given to help others, as they come to see the Lord through your actions. In the words of Elder Neal A. Maxwell: Brigham Young University seeks to improve and ­“sanctify” itself for the sake of others—not for the praise of the world, but to serve the world better.3 When you accomplish something significant at BYU—which I hope happens often—think first of how what you have done can help others, not just how it might impress them. Maybe instead of bragging to your classmates about how well you did on an exam, you might humbly find ways to help them prepare for the next exam. If you do, you will increase their and your understanding of the subject. You will also increase their faith and your faith in the goodness of God and of His children. At the end of the day, Christ is the light that we are to “hold up—that which [we] have seen [Him] do” (3 Nephi 18:24). “How would Jesus react to doing well—or poorly—on an exam?” is a great question to ask ourselves if we want to be lighted by the Y. Live in a Way That Reflects His Life The second suggestion flows from the first. As we recognize that Christ is the true source of the light and as we remember that He desires His light to shine through us so that others may come unto Him, we can easily see that one way to increase the extent to which our experience at BYU lights us is by living our lives in a way that reflects His. Our mission statement challenges us to create “an environment . . . sustained by those moral virtues which characterize the life and teachings of the Son of God.”4 That is one of the principal reasons for our Honor Code: to create an environment in which we are reminded of the kind of individuals and community we hope to become—a community reflecting the teachings of the Savior. In that regard, I call particular attention to our personal and collective commitment to treat with respect, dignity, and love all those with whom we interact, both on and off campus, including, and especially, those with whom we may disagree, even on very important matters. While others, perhaps well intentioned, may deride us and our values, we must respond the way the Savior did, without compromising either eternal truths and values or the eternal reality that “all human beings [are] beloved spirit son[s] or daughter[s] of heavenly parents,” each with “a divine nature and destiny.”5 Our mission statement makes clear that “all relationships within the BYU community should reflect devout love of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor.”6 The light of the Y will be most evident in your lives if you live in accordance with that charge and with all the other principles of the Honor Code to which you have committed your integrity. There are other daily activities—not expressly included in the Honor Code—that can enhance the light of the Y in your lives. Regular scripture study is one example. I was reminded of that truth by one of our football players a number of years ago. Brian Logan transferred to BYU in 2009 after two years at a junior college. I first met him shortly before the opening game of the season against then third-ranked Oklahoma. I quickly discovered that Brian was a person who was full of enthusiasm, energy, and a love of God. Though not a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Brian fully embraced the opportunity to be a part of our covenant community and sought to influence others for good in that regard. He was also a very good defensive back. Let me show you a picture of Brian after the Oklahoma game—which BYU won. You can see what I mean about enthusiasm. Like you, I noticed that there was a message written on the eye black beneath his eyes. It was Philippians 4:13. I must admit I did not know off the top of my head what that scripture said, and in the excitement of the victory I did not have a chance to ask Brian. Later that night I looked up the scripture. It reads, “I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.” I imagined in my own mind how this scripture provided Brian with optimism in preparing for a game in which BYU was the decided underdog. As I attended the next game, I saw that Brian had again applied the eye black and that there was writing on it. I was at such a distance that I couldn’t read the writing. After the game—a resounding victory over an opponent we were expected to defeat—I approached Brian, fully expecting that I would find the same scriptural reference on the eye black and assuming that it was his favorite. Much to my surprise, the writing referred to a different scripture: Luke 14:11. Again, not knowing right off what that particular scripture said, I asked Brian. He quickly replied, “For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” I then asked him why he had changed the scripture reference. He told me that as he read the scriptures each day, he sought inspiration about what message God wanted him to focus on for the game that week. Against a highly ranked opponent the first week, it was the message of courage in Philippians 4:13; against an opponent that some players might be tempted to overlook the following week, it was the message of humility found in Luke. For the rest of that season I looked forward to my postgame interaction with Brian. I would grab him by the shoulder pads, look him straight on, and say, “Let me read your eyes!” In the ­ensuing weeks I saw references to Proverbs 3:5, Isaiah 54:17, and other relevant scriptures, each reflecting personal inspiration that Brian had experienced as a result of his regular Bible study. For one game he even threw in a Book of Mormon scripture—maybe just for my sake. I am confident that many of you have had similar revelatory experiences as you have regularly studied the scriptures in light of your own personal circumstances. I invite all of you to do so. If you do, it will be reflected in your eyes, even if it is not written on eye black. I also urge you to engage in other activities that will invite the Spirit in your life, such as involvement in service opportunities through your ward or other organizations such as Y-Serve. As you seek to contribute to an environment that reflects those virtues that characterize the life and teachings of the Savior, your BYU experiences will ­create new light in you. Discover and Develop Your Talents and Skills Third, I urge you to discover and develop your talents and skills at BYU. This is one of the main purposes of this distinctive portion of your earth life. Your time at BYU is, as the mission statement says, to be “a period of intensive learning.”7 Such focused learning is designed, in large part, to help you acquire and enhance new knowledge, skills, and attributes. All of you have already discovered and refined many of your talents and gifts. You would not be here if you had not. Let me suggest, however, that the Lord sent you here—to BYU—knowing that you could both discover new gifts and enhance those you already know about. In the Book of Mormon in the sermon at the temple—in which Christ in His visit to the Americas repeated many of the teachings He had provided in the Sermon on the Mount to those in the Old World—the Savior repeated the essence of the commandment in Matthew that we are to be a light to the world. However, as my son recently pointed out to me, there is a slight but significant clarification in the message in the Book of Mormon. In Matthew 5:14 the Lord stated simply, “Ye are the light of the world.” In 3 Nephi 12:14 the Lord said, “I give unto you to be the light of this people.” This sounds more like a gift—more like an opportunity than a commandment. Like all divinely provided opportunities, it implies confidence in our abilities. God often gives us opportunities because He knows He has prepared us in ways we may not fully recognize or appreciate at the time. In that regard, the language the Savior used in 3 Nephi—“I give unto you”—is instructively similar to that in the Doctrine and Covenants when the Lord stated that “to every man [and woman] is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby” (D&C 46:11–12; emphasis added). God has given each of you individualized gifts to prepare you to contribute to His work in individual ways. God has given other people other individualized gifts so that they can contribute in their own individual ways. When you apply these truths to this educational phase of your life, two things become apparent. 1. You should search broadly to discover and develop all the gifts God has given you, lest you not accomplish all God wants you to do. We know from the scriptural promise in section 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants that all of you have at least one gift, and I am confident that for all of you the number can be multiplied many times. I am also confident that you don’t know all the talents you have. And the only way you can know what those talents are is to explore a variety of topics—which our general education requirement encourages you to do—and to take some chances in doing new things that may stretch you in new ways. Don’t become so concerned with protecting your GPA that you miss out on one of the most exciting parts of your education: discovering and enhancing the gifts God gave you so that you can better serve Him and His children. 2. Because your gifts are individually tailored to you, don’t measure your progress or importance by comparing yourself to others. Such comparisons will not only cause you to miss out on some of the important things you can learn from others but also interfere with your ability to develop productive, joyful relationships with the many good people around you. If you view everyone as a potential competitor, you will soon find yourself surrounded by enemies. If you view those around you as guides who can help you learn, you will soon find yourself surrounded by friends. Never Underestimate the Power Your Light Can Have Fourth, and finally, never underestimate the power your light can have on others. Let me illustrate this with a reference to a lighthouse. All of us are familiar with lighthouses. They send out a beacon of light that can hopefully be seen in the worst weather. They mark the line where the sea ends and the land begins—a very important marker for those who are piloting boats, especially in bad weather. But lighthouses also have another role to play for those who are piloting boats. In addition to marking the place at which the sea ends and the land begins, lighthouses can, with the help of other lights, guide sailors through treacherous waters in which reefs and other unseen barriers might sink the ship. In such situations there is often only one safe passage to the harbor, and the only way the pilot knows the ship is in that passage is by maneuvering the ship so that the light at the top of the lighthouse aligns with a carefully placed light on the shore. Once the ship is in that position, it can proceed safely as long as those lights—the one in the lighthouse and the one on the shore—are in alignment with each other. If they are out of alignment, the ship is off course, and there is considerable risk of a tragic shipwreck. One writer related the following true example: More than a hundred years ago, a well-known Protestant preacher, Dwight L. Moody, shared a story of a ship trying to enter the Cleveland harbor on a very stormy night. The ship’s captain could see the bright light of the Cleveland harbor lighthouse. However, the lower lights weren’t visible at all. The lower lights were the way that ships identified the centerline of the safe entry to a harbor. Because the lower lights were not burning that night, the ship missed the entrance to the harbor and crashed into rocks. Many lives were lost. At the end of his sermon, Moody said, “Brethren, the Master will take care of the great lighthouse; let us keep the lower lights burning.”8 One of the members of Moody’s congregation that day was a man named Philip Paul Bliss, a musician. Bliss was so inspired by the lesson in Moody’s sermon that he wrote a hymn, which in our hymnbook is entitled “Brightly Beams Our Father’s Mercy.” Many of you will be familiar with the hymn. All of you should be. With the image of the lighthouse and this experience in mind, consider the message of the first verse of that hymn: Brightly beams our Father’s mercy From his lighthouse evermore, But to us he gives the keeping Of the lights along the shore. Let the lower lights be burning; Send a gleam across the wave. Some poor fainting, struggling seaman You may rescue, you may save.9 The lighthouse of God’s love for His children is ever present and never moving. It is constant and always available. Some people will see it and will be drawn to it, but they may not know how to get to it. Your example may provide the lower light they need to see the safe passage. More may depend on how you use your time at BYU than just your own well-being. The light you gain here may influence others for eternity. There is a remarkable promise in Doctrine and Covenants 88:67, a promise Elder Dallin H. Oaks once called “the most significant promise ever given pertaining to education.”10 It reads: And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. I urge you to let the Y light you in such a way that you are filled with that light. You will then be successful not only in this particular educational endeavor but also in the rest of your life. As I recently told the faculty and staff, and as I also recently told those at new student orientation, I now say to you all: You are not here by accident. God has a work to perform through you. Make Him the center of your efforts. Do what He would want you to do. Let His light shine more brightly through you as a result of your experiences at BYU. If you do, miracles will happen in your life and you will see the majesty of the Lord work in the lives of others. May you realize this ­blessing—may the light in you shine more brilliantly because of what you do at BYU—is my prayer, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, amen. <start> My message to you today is that truth does exist, it does matter, and it can be discerned. A major part of your purpose here at BYU is to enhance your knowledge of the truth and your ability to discern it. Each year Oxford Dictionaries selects a word of the year—“a word, or expression, that . . . is judged to reflect the . . . mood . . . of that particular year and to have lasting potential as a word of cultural significance.” Past selections include unfriend in 2009 and selfie in 2013. In 2015 the word of the year was not a word but a pictograph: the “face with tears of joy” emoji.1 Recently, Oxford Dictionaries announced that the word of the year for 2016 is post-truth, a word they define as “an adjective . . . denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief.”2 Casper Grathwohl, president of Oxford Dictionaries, explained the selection: “Fuelled by the rise of social media as a news source and a growing distrust of facts offered up by the establishment, post-truth as a concept has been finding its linguistic footing for some time. . . . I wouldn’t be surprised if post-truth becomes one of the defining words of our time.”3 Reflecting this view, several commentators have recently asserted that we live in a post-truth world, or a world in which truth “has become unimportant or irrelevant.”4 It is hard to know with certainty whether truth is really less important than it has been in the past. But it is clear that because we live in a digital age, in which there is so much information and there are so many different contending views of what is accurate, some people find that new information confounds and confuses rather than clarifies and enlightens. Modernizing the plight of the thirsty Ancient Mariner, who proclaimed, “Water, water, everywhere, Nor any drop to drink,”5 many today lament, “Data, data, everywhere, and not a thought to think.”6 Living in a post-truth world in which there is more information available than there is time to process it presents particular challenges. Many do not know how to determine the accuracy or the truthfulness of new information. Some deal with the matter by looking for reinforcement of their own preexisting, and sometimes ill-informed, notions, limiting their pursuit of truth to only those sources that support their views. Stuck in an echo chamber of their own making, they stunt their ability to learn truth by sealing themselves off from any meaningful dialogue with any who may have different viewpoints. A manifestation of this is the increasing polarization in American politics.7 Others go to the opposite extreme, finding any piece of information that disrupts their prior views as sufficient reason to throw aside, without further inquiry, truths that have provided sure guidance to them and others in the past. These individuals, to use the words of the apostle Paul, are “tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men.”8 This tendency sometimes manifests itself as a crisis of faith—triggered by the receipt of pieces of information, true or not, that do not coincide with previously held views. While there are many causes for political polarization and crises of faith, one common feature is that they are often a partial result of living in a post-truth world in which truth seems so difficult to discern that many may wonder whether it is worth the effort—or even possible at all. The Existence and Importance of Truth My message to you today is that truth does exist, it does matter, and it can be discerned. A major part of your purpose here at BYU is to enhance your knowledge of the truth and your ability to discern it. In fact, a major part of our purpose in this mortal existence is to enhance and refine our ability to discern, apply, and ultimately internalize truth. Scriptures reveal that one of the defining characteristics of Christ—and one source of His supreme power—is that He is full of truth.9 His knowledge of all truth and His adherence to those principles gives Him all power. Indeed, He has internalized truth so well that He rightly proclaimed that He is “the truth.”10 He further declared that if we come to know the truth in its fullest sense, the truth will make us free11—free to realize our full potential as sons and daughters of God and “joint-heirs with Christ.”12 One of our hymns thus correctly asserts that truth is “the brightest prize To which mortals or Gods can aspire.”13 To give us hope that we can eventually realize this almost incomprehensible goal of being full of truth, the scriptures make clear that Christ “received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness.”14 Thus it is both important and possible for us to be able to discern, apply, and internalize truth, despite the fact that we may be living in a post-truth world. And one of the major purposes of your education here is to progress in that manner. The BYU mission statement indicates that ­“students at BYU should receive a broad university education.” One of the principal ways we do that is through our general education requirements. Because of those requirements, most of you are familiar with this part of our mission and mission statement. However, we too often skip over the introductory phrase to that charge. BYU students are to receive a broad university education, the mission statement says, “because the gospel encourages the pursuit of all truth.”15 That statement implies at least three things: (1) that there is such a thing as truth, (2) that its acquisition is possible, and (3) that facilitating its pursuit is one of the purposes of this university. The Definition of Truth But all this begs the question that Pontius Pilate put to the Savior: “What is truth?”16 We could spend well more than several devotionals pursuing that question in depth. Indeed, there are courses on this and other campuses dedicated to that very question,17 and philosophers have for centuries debated both the nature and the existence of truth without coming to any definite consensus. While Christ did not answer Pilate’s question directly, in modern revelation He has provided both testimony that truth exists and a general definition of what it encompasses. In section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord declared, “Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come.”18 The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob echoed the same theme, observing that truth includes “things as they really are, and . . . things as they really will be.”19 That simple definition is more profound than it may at first appear. For example, because it defines things as they really are, truth is not dependent on popular opinion or the assent of experts. It is, to use the scriptural phrase, “independent in that sphere in which God has placed it.”20 President Spencer W. Kimball explained it this way: The earth is spherical. If all the . . . people in the world think it flat, they are in error. That is an absolute truth, and all the arguing in the world will not change it. . . . God, our Heavenly Father, . . . lives. That is an absolute truth. All . . . the children of men on the earth might be ignorant of him and his attributes and his powers, but he still lives. All the people on the earth might deny him and disbelieve, but he lives in spite of them. They may have their own opinions, but he still lives, and his form, powers, and attributes do not change according to men’s opinions. In short, opinion alone has no power in the matter of an absolute truth.21 Truth is not only independent; it is completely comprehensive. It encompasses all knowledge and all accurate information—in all worlds that have ever been or ever will be. As B. H. Roberts put it: When you say that truth is that which is, that which has been, and that which is to be in future, . . . you make it “the sum of existence”: You will include the past, present, and future of all existences—their “sum”; and this is truth: The “sum” of existences, past, present, and yet to be.22 Given that there are worlds—or existences—“without number,”23 knowledge of all aspects of each of their pasts, presents, and futures is vast and comprehensive. Thus, in one sense, as Elder Roberts noted, “The absolute truth as . . . set forth [in section 93] is beyond the grasp of the finite mind.”24 However, it is incumbent upon us to learn as much of the truth as we can as part of our pathway in becoming like Him who embodies all truth. Brigham Young put it this way: “[Our] religion . . . prompts [us] to search diligently after knowledge. There is no other people in existence more eager to see, hear, learn, and understand truth.”25 And this is where your current experience at BYU comes in. The Role of Study and Faith in Pursuing Truth BYU is an educational institution. It is a place dedicated to the acquisition of knowledge. In section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord provided a list of things we should learn. You should be familiar with it. It sounds much like the broad general education that we provide to all our students as part of our mission statement. We are to be instructed . . . in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God . . . ; Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms.26 That description seems to cover pretty much everything from geology to geography and from astronomy to anthropology. But note especially these three subjects in the middle of the list: “things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass.” While this is not a verbatim repetition of the definition of truth in section 93, it is so close that the two are surely connected. That it is embedded in the middle of this more specific list of subjects suggests that truth is found in each of these other subjects and, correspondingly, that when we study any of these topics, we are engaged in “the pursuit of all truth,” as our mission statement challenges us to do. Thus all courses at this university—indeed, all we do at this university—should be focused on the pursuit of truth. But the pursuit of truth requires that we be able to recognize it and that we be able to distinguish information that is true from that which is not. How are we to do that, especially in a world that is increasingly post-truth? The familiar scriptural injunction that we “seek learning . . . by study and also by faith”27 is fully applicable in this regard. The role of study in the identification and acquisition of truth is more well-known and widespread in universities. That is likely the primary means by which you will come to develop the skills and capacity to discern and apply truth in the subjects you are studying. You will hopefully develop your capacity to think clearly and rationally about the matters put before you. That is how most students at most colleges spend most of their time, and that is how most of you will spend most of your time here. But at BYU we are committed to the proposition that faith can also play a critical role in the recognition and acquisition of truth. Alma distinguished faith from perfect knowledge. He noted that “faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things” but instead is a “hope for things which are not seen, which are true.”28 But this hope is not a self-created wish. Faith is, as described in Hebrews, “the substance [or the assurance29] of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.”30 Thus faith seems to be a God-granted way of discerning truth before one has perfect knowledge of the matter. Faith is an extra-rational means of discerning truth—through revelation. Elder Dallin H. Oaks has observed that ­“revelation . . . occurs when a scientist, an inventor, an artist or great leader receives flashes of enlightenment from a loving God for the benefit of His children.”31 I suspect that many of you have had the experience of being stuck on a problem for hours or days or even weeks or months and then having the solution come to you in a flash. I certainly have. I can best account for those sudden insights by reference to Joseph Smith’s description of the revelatory process, in which he said, “You feel pure intelligence flowing into you, [giving] you sudden strokes of ideas.”32 Such revelatory experiences are greatly enhanced, as the Prophet Joseph taught, by the exercise and enhancement of our faith in Jesus Christ.33 The fact that faith is a lesser-known means of discerning truth should not obscure the reality that it is, in the long run, more reliable than mere rational argument, which depends on the experience and limited reasoning abilities of imperfect, mortal beings. It is, after all, “by the power of the Holy Ghost” that we “may know the truth of all things.”34 Indeed, the most important truths can be learned only by revelation based on faith. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell explained, “God’s plan . . . is not something to be deduced by logic alone, nor is human experience deep enough or long enough to inform us adequately. It requires revelation from God.”35 While study and faith are two different tools in the process of discerning and acquiring truth, the two are interconnected in that process. For example, faith can be the initial impetus for productive study. Faith in a perfect God whose word does not fail and who created worlds governed by eternal laws that do not change36 gives us an assurance that the often difficult, and sometimes tedious and frustrating, work of acquiring truth by study is an endeavor worth pursuing. If we truly had no belief or hope that there are ultimate answers to our questions, we would be less likely to engage in a deep, meaningful search for the answers. Faith in God can provide the hope, and—in its more advanced stages—even the certainty, that we are seeking for something that can be found. Similarly, study is often a prerequisite for the revelatory experience that characterizes learning by faith. As President Spencer W. Kimball once observed, “Perspiration must precede inspiration; there must be effort before there is excellence.”37 Elder Oaks explained that “revelation in a particular discipline or skill is most likely to come to one who has paid the price of learning all that has previously been revealed [on that subject].”38 Discerning truth by study and by faith is not an easy process. You should not expect that if you study enough and have enough faith that you will be able to complete the process before you graduate, either from this university or even this mortal existence. In a post-truth environment—indeed, in any mortal environment—challenges will come and questions will arise to which we don’t have ready answers. How do we know in those situations what is truth? Let me provide four suggestions that I believe are specific applications of the “by study and also by faith” paradigm I have described. These are four things that may help you better distinguish truth from falsehood and productively deal with the uncertainty inherent in the truth-seeking process. First, when you receive new information, consider the source. Some sources are more reliable than others. In the digital age, everyone has a platform. That has some upside, as it allows voices that were previously unheard to participate in the conversation that is part of the pursuit of truth. At the same time, it allows almost anyone to claim almost anything without the same fact-checking filter that has existed for many mainstream sources in the past. If the information comes from a source with which you are not familiar, both the source and the information might require more in-depth scrutiny. At one level, we all know the assertion “it is on the Internet, so it must be true” is a false statement. But too many act as if it is true. On the flip side, there are sources of information that have a long track record of reliability and veracity. Peer-reviewed texts and articles are usually more likely to be trusted for that very reason. That is why the educational process relies so heavily upon them. More important, the scriptures are always reliable and are always true. They therefore serve as a measuring stick for other information. That is one reason they are called “standard works.” The teachings of modern prophets are similarly reliable, particularly if they are repeated over a period of time.39 Second, consider the context in which the information arose and is presented. A statement may be accurately reported but still be untrue because it is taken out of context. The story is told of a candidate for election to the local school board who urged voters not to support his opponent because witnesses accurately reported that she had said that the first thing she would do would be to burn down the school. What the candidate failed to reveal is that his opponent made the statement forty years earlier when she was unprepared for an assignment in her second-grade class. Context does matter. In that regard, I urge you to evaluate new information in light of the entire plan of salvation—one guiding truth that provides accurate context for all aspects of our lives. Evaluating new information in light of the plan of salvation is helpful both because it helps determine the veracity of the information and because it helps determine how important the information is. Third, be patient, both with yourself and with the process. It is important to understand and remember that one purpose of our mortal experience is to learn to operate by faith—to discern truth without perfect knowledge. Thus, in this life there will never be ready answers to all our questions, despite what modern technology may cause us to think. As Elder M. Russell Ballard observed, “James did not say, ‘If any of you lack wisdom, let him Google!’”40 Instead, God created an entire earthly experience to allow us to develop our ability to recognize and apply truth through trial and error so that we could increase our ability to act by faith. Furthermore, there are likely eternal truths that we simply cannot comprehend in our current mortal and finite condition. And without all truth, we cannot answer all questions. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell once observed, sometimes “we can’t make it all add up because clearly we do not have all the numbers.”41 So don’t be distressed if you don’t find all the answers immediately. The pursuit of truth is a lifetime and likely eternal pursuit. In the meantime, hold on to what you know to be true, as Elder Jeffrey R. Holland and President Dieter F. Uchtdorf have both implored us to do.42 Fourth, and most important, if you want to understand truth, draw closer to Him who is the source of all truth and light, who declared Himself—even Jesus Christ—to be “the way, the truth, and the life.”43 Every single point I have made—the existence of truth, the definition of truth, the importance of truth, and the role of study and faith in pursuing the truth—rises or falls with Jesus Christ. If you have doubts about Him, that is where you need to begin the process. President Joseph Fielding Smith once observed: The greatest truth [is] . . . that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, who came into this world to die that men might live. . . . It is far more important to know that . . . than it is to know all that can be obtained in secular education.44 I close by bearing my witness that Jesus Christ lives. He is the Truth. He and only He can lead you to all truth. He is anxious to bless you not only in your educational endeavors here but in all your doings in all places at all times. If you will focus on Him in your pursuit of truth, you will succeed here and beyond. This I witness in His holy name, even Jesus Christ, amen. <start> In this setting today it is worth noting that the two terms we hear often at graduation—alma mater and alumni—both originally referred to a special relationship, one very much like but also different from that between a parent and a child. I have long been fascinated by words and language. My children would call me a word nerd. I’m the kind of person who wonders why we drive on parkways and park on driveways. Think about it. Shouldn’t it be the other way around? Similarly, have you ever wondered if a fly lost its wings, would we call it a walk? Again, you have to think about it—and now you know why my children groan a lot when I try to use my sense of humor. My love of language is one reason why I enjoy graduation ceremonies so much. At graduation we hear words that we don’t ordinarily use in everyday life. We use terms like cum laude, with either summa or magna attached as modifiers; these are not terms typically bandied about during the family dinner hour. Two of the terms we often hear at graduation are alma mater and alumni. In a few minutes Amy Fennegan will officially welcome you graduates as alumni of BYU, and upon graduation, BYU will become your alma mater. Again, these are not words that we use in many other settings. Interestingly, at least to me, and instructively, neither of these terms originated in connection with graduation or even higher education. Alma mater is a two-word Latin term that literally translated means “bounteous [or] nourishing mother.”1 In its early form, “it was a title given by the Romans to several goddesses but in particular to Ceres and Cybele, both representing fostering mother figures.”2 The association with higher education came many centuries later when the University of Bologna—which many identify as the first university in the Western world—adopted as its motto Alma mater studiorum, meaning “nurturing mother of studies.”3 Since that time alma mater has been used in a variety of ways at universities. And the idea that universities play a special “nurturing” role in the development of their students—somewhat like though not identical to that of a parent—has taken hold in American society to the extent that the prevailing definition of alma mater now is the university or college from which one has graduated.4 The term alumni similarly developed outside of academia and likewise referred to a special, almost parent-like relationship. In Rome, alumni was first used as a term that generally referred to “children abandoned by their parents and brought up in the home of someone else”5—what we might now call foster children. Over time the term alumni came to also refer to students or pupils in an educational setting. In this setting today it is worth noting that the two terms we hear often at graduation—alma mater and alumni—both originally referred to a special relationship, one very much like but also different from that between a parent and a child. Moreover, the two terms were linguistically connected from the outset, as they both derive to some extent from the same Latin term alere, which means “nourish.”6 Now some of you are no doubt beginning to wonder if there is a point to this lesson on the etymology of these two Latin terms. Let me suggest three short ideas. First, given their origin and history, hearing the terms alma mater and alumni should remind all of you graduates that you have not achieved the success we are celebrating this day on your own. In addition to your own family ­members—parents, spouses, children, siblings, and grandparents—who have supported you through this endeavor, there are many others, including many at this university, who have nurtured and shaped you in ways that have enhanced and become part of your university education. These alma maters—these nurturing mothers and fathers—include faculty members who have tried to help you learn and progress both intellectually and spiritually, who have loved you almost as much as their own children, and who have loved you enough to draw from you the very best you had to offer—and sometimes more than you thought you had to give. These alma maters also include others who have provided services such as meals, technology, clean rooms, and beautiful grounds—all in an effort to create a stimulating setting in which learning “by study and also by faith”7 can flourish. These alma maters include your classmates, who in some ways have contributed to your deep learning beyond what the faculty has done. And these alma maters include both generous donors and humble tithe payers, who have given of their funds to support you, even though they have never met you and may never come to Provo. Each of these individuals has in a sense nurtured you as an alumnus, or foster child, whom they took in and loved. Each of them is in a sense your alma mater. When you hear the term alma mater, I urge you to think not of buildings or bricks and mortar but of people and relationships. When you proudly proclaim that BYU is your alma mater, please have in mind all the alma maters who have contributed to you in so many ways. Second, the fact that you have been nurtured by so many gives rise to an obligation to nurture others. As alumni who have benefited from the care of others when you may have felt alone, you have a responsibility to become alma maters to others who may one day feel abandoned. As the hymn reminds us, “because [we] have been given much, [we] too must give.”8 “Enter to learn; go forth to serve” is not just a motto; it is a university and gospel imperative. Third, I hope that when you hear the terms alma mater and alumni and remember their familial origins and connotations, you reflect on the glorious truth that as important as the relationship is between you as alumni and the many people who have made BYU your alma mater, it pales in comparison to one central and eternal family relationship. I hope your time at BYU has increased your appreciation of the breadth of meaning and the depth of importance of the eternal truth that “each [of you] is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.”9 I urge you to reflect on that truth at this time of celebration and gratitude. It will provide hope in times of distress and motivation to help others in times of success. If you do that, we, your alma maters, will be pleased to call you our alumni. That it may be so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> In a sense then, our own iconic symbol can convey the kind of unique educational experience we hope to provide to our students. We might say that the letter Y explains why—W-H-Y—we exist and what we hope to accomplish. The theme of this year’s BYU annual university conference comes from Doctrine and Covenants 128, which is a letter written by Joseph Smith to the Saints in September 1842. It is in the form of a rhetorical question: “Shall we not go on in so great a cause?”—the implicit answer being, “Of course!”1 The particular cause that Joseph was addressing when he wrote this inspired epistle was baptism for the dead—a great cause indeed. The cause in which we are now engaged is a different one. Or, more correctly, it is a different part of the same great cause—the greatest cause of all—the overarching cause of all of God’s work “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life”2 of His children. That our work at Brigham Young University is part of this greater cause is made clear by the opening sentence of our Brigham Young University mission statement, which plainly states that our main purpose “is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.”3 Those who have heard me speak in the past three months will not be surprised to hear me start with the mission statement. That document, to use the words of Joseph, “seems to occupy my mind, and press itself upon my feelings the strongest”4 since I was appointed president. This morning I would like to review with you some of the key principles in our mission statement with the ultimate aim of helping us better understand the great cause in which we are engaged and the ways in which each of us can better carry out our roles in this cause. Let me begin by highlighting one of the key principles of the mission statement—one that is found only implicitly in that document and, therefore, one that is possible to overlook, as obvious as it may seem. The principle is this: Our mission as a university focuses on the students. While that exact statement does not appear anywhere in the mission statement, the document is founded on that assumption. • The word students appears in the mission statement seven times. • The word faculty appears twice. • The terms administrators and staff appear only once each. Although I am quite confident that the authors of the mission statement did not engage in a careful word analysis to ensure that the relative importance of each group was precisely represented in the numeric ratio of the nouns used in the document, I think noting these occurrences is not a bad way of reminding ourselves that our mission focuses on the students and not on us or on anyone else. At the end of the day, students are the product we produce, to put it in business terms. How they turn out—what they do and, more important, who they are—is the ultimate metric by which our work will be measured. And by that measure we are doing quite well. Our graduates are succeeding in the world of work, in their communities, and in their homes. But lest we become puffed up in unrighteous pride for things not of our own doing, let me remind you that we start with very good raw material, so to speak. As a result of their own gifts and hard work as well as the loving nurture of families and communities, our students are extraordinary people even before they arrive on campus—before we have had any impact at all on them. Just to give you one incomplete view of what we start with, here are some facts about the students who were admitted during our most recent admission process. This spring we admitted 6,997 potential students—just over half of the 12,698 students who applied. Now, not all of those 6,997 will show up, but this is what the group looks like at this point. The average ACT score of these students we admitted is 28.81, and 42.4 percent of them have an ACT score of 30 or higher. The average high school GPA of this class is 3.83. Over half had a GPA of 3.9 or higher—that is, the median is at least 3.9. Of these admitted students, 22.1 percent of them graduated as one of the top five students in their class—not the top 5 percent but the top five. And these students did not achieve these impressive academic credentials by locking themselves in the library all day and ignoring everything but their studies. • 70.7 percent of them participated in high school sports • 77.5 percent of them participated in musical groups, dance, plays, or concerts • 77 percent were employed during high school • 82.7 percent earned their Duty to God or Young Womanhood Recognition awards • 95.6 percent graduated from four years of seminary, with almost half of those attending early-morning seminary No wonder our graduates turn out so well. As a group, they come to us with a remarkable amount of talent, intellect, and experience in the gospel. The real question for us is, “Are we doing as much as we can to enhance the development of these outstanding students during their relatively brief tenure with us?” That is a question we should ask ourselves regularly, particularly as we begin new programs, activities, or initiatives or make decisions about the future. At such times we would do well to ask ourselves this question: “How is this course of action—the one we are considering—going to enhance the educational experience of our students?” If the answer is “not at all,” we might want to think twice about adopting that particular course of action. If the answer is that it will undermine that educational experience for these students, we would want to think a lot more about it—usually enough more that we forget what we were thinking about. In short, we are and will remain a student-centric university, one that focuses on the development of our students above all else. With every major decision we make, we need to ask ourselves how this endeavor can enhance the educational experience of our students. To answer that question in any meaningful way, we have to know what kind of experience we want our students to have. That brings us back to the mission statement. As noted previously, the main goal of our educational experience is to help students in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Although the mission statement was approved by the BYU Board of Trustees in 1981, Karl G. Maeser articulated this ultimate ambitious goal more than 100 years ago, as explained in Professor Buddy Richards’ recent biography of Maeser. In November 1900, three months before he died, Maeser was invited to attend a Founders Day celebration at Maeser Elementary School, a public school in Provo that had been named in his honor two years earlier. During his visit in 1900, Maeser wrote a different phrase on the chalkboard of each of the four classrooms to summarize his teachings and his thoughts about education.5 On the blackboard in the corner of the southwest classroom, he wrote, “This life is one great object lesson to practice on the principles of immortality and eternal life.”6 That has been the ambitious goal of this place from the outset, and it remains so today. But we are not the only institution or individuals who have a part in that exalting process. As the language indicates, our mission is to “assist” in that process, not to make it happen. Agency and the key contributions of others—including, principally, the central role of the Savior’s Atonement—make it such that we are not solely responsible for the exaltation of any of our students. So it is important for us to understand what our role is in the quest for perfection and eternal life in the lives of these students. That is explained in the very next sentence from the mission statement: “That assistance should provide a period of intensive learning in a stimulating setting where a commitment to excellence is expected and the full realization of human potential is pursued.”7 There are three key principles in that sentence, each of which is further elaborated in succeeding sections of the mission statement. First, our role is an educational role. We are to provide a period of intensive learning. As then President Dallin H. Oaks stated in his inaugural address more than forty years ago: “Our reason for being is to be a university.”8 Note that the goal is to provide a period of learning, not teaching—two things that, while related, are not always the same. Our recent emphasis on learning outcomes rather than on teaching inputs is in line with the mission statement. I commend all those who have undertaken the difficult task of evaluating what we want students to learn in our programs and even in individual courses. That effort will not only place us in good stead with our major accrediting body as they visit us this coming year but will also properly align us with this key part of our mission statement. Note also that the learning experience is to be “intensive.” That word has roots in the Latin term intendere, which means to “stretch” or “strain.”9 We should not be afraid to stretch our students intellectually. In fact, if we don’t do so, we will not be meeting the board’s expectations. As their academic indicators demonstrate, our students are capable of doing more than student bodies of the past. And we need to require them to do their best so they realize their full potential, which is likely greater than they understand. But we must take care to do so in ways that clearly indicate our ultimate goal and motivation. Again, Brother Maeser provided us with an example at the outset. One of his former students, George Sutherland—who went on to become a U.S. Supreme Court justice—described the way Maeser worked with his students: He saw the shortcomings as well as the excellences of his pupils, and while he never hesitated to point them out—sometimes in a genial, humorous way—it was always with such an undercurrent of kindly interest that no criticism ever left a sting. 10 We need to stretch our students in the same way, pointing out when and where they are deficient but always in a way that leaves no doubt of our overriding concern for their well-being. Second, while we will not do everything that other universities do, the expectation is that everything we do will be first-rate. According to the mission statement, “a commitment to excellence” is expected. It is not an aspiration; it is an expectation. That same principle is articulated later in the portion of the mission statement discussing the curriculum: “The university cannot provide programs in all possible areas of professional or vocational work, but in those it does provide the preparation must be excellent.”11 Note the verb must—not should. Again, the commitment to excellence is an expectation, not an aspiration. President Oaks further stated in his inaugural address: We cannot use success in attaining our spiritual goals . . . as an alibi for failure to enjoy first-class status as a university. We must reinforce our drive for excellence in all areas of the university and persist for superiority in some. 12 This commitment to excellence is not limited to the academic part of our endeavor. As the next section of the mission statement makes clear, no one is excused from that commitment: “All instruction, programs, and services at BYU, including a wide variety of extracurricular experiences, should make their own contribution”13 to our overarching goal. Just as our graduates “should be capable of competing with the best in their fields,”14 our grounds crew should be as good as there is—likewise our physical facilities group, our financial services personnel, and all other important support groups. Each must have the same commitment to excellence in its area. And our athletic programs and our performing groups should aspire to be as good as the best in their fields. “All” means all—not some. Third, the end of all we do—both the intensive learning and the other activities that enhance the student’s experience—is not just to prepare students for their first job or professional career, nor even to enjoy and appreciate their mortal experience more fully, which are the very worthwhile goals of many other universities. At the end of the day, we have a distinctive, even unique, end in mind. We are to pursue “the full realization of human potential” of our students. And our view of that potential is, indeed, unique. As we know from “The Family: A Proclamation to the World”: All human beings . . . are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny. 15 Quoting Elder Oaks once again, “Our reason for being is to be a university. But our reason for being a university is to encourage and prepare young men and women to rise to their full spiritual potential as sons and daughters of God.”16 Keeping in mind that broader context, the mission statement outlines the “four major educational goals”17 we have for our students. The curricular aspects of those goals are outlined in the topic sentences of the three middle paragraphs of the mission statement: 1. “All students at BYU should be taught the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.” 2. “Because the gospel encourages the pursuit of all truth, students at BYU should receive a broad university education.” 3. “In addition to a strong general education, students should also receive instruction in the special fields of their choice.”18 While there is much that could be extracted from these sentences and their accompanying paragraphs, let me emphasize just two points for today’s purposes. First, notice the sequence. The first and foundational part of the curriculum consists of the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ. That certainly includes the doctrine of the Church and the truths taught in modern and ancient scripture. But it is not enough to offer—or even require—our students to take courses in religious education. If the only insights that students receive on gospel truths are in their religion classes, we will not be that different from other good universities to which an institute of religion is attached. What will truly make us unique—and what we must uniquely do well—is to meet the challenge set forth by President Spencer W. Kimball: That every professor and teacher in this institution would keep his [or her] subject matter bathed in the light and color of the restored gospel and have all his [or her] subject matter perfumed lightly with the spirit of the gospel. 19 Brother Maeser established the tone early on. In his final address as principal of Brigham Young Academy, he noted that when the words of President Brigham Young—that neither the alphabet nor the multiplication table was to be taught without the Spirit of God—were given as the mainspring of all teaching, the orientation for the course of the educational system inaugurated by the foundation of this academy was made, and any deviation from it would lead inevitably to disastrous results. 20 The second point is related to the first. We pursue the expanded knowledge characterized as “a broad university education” or “a strong general education” not so that our students will be able to engage in intelligent conversation on a variety of topics but “because the gospel encourages the pursuit of all truth.” Our curricular choice to require general education is not motivated solely by a desire to imitate the best universities but by the firm doctrinal teaching that the acquisition of such knowledge is a gospel imperative. And it is a gospel imperative because such knowledge prepares us for our ultimate destiny—to become like our heavenly parents. As Orson Pratt put it: The study of science is the study of something eternal. If we study astronomy, we study the works of God. If we study chemistry, geology, optics, or any other branch of science, every new truth we come to the understanding of is eternal; it is a part of the great system of universal truth. It is truth that exists throughout universal nature; and God is the dispenser of all truth—scientific, religious, and political. 21 While there are other portions of the mission statement we might profitably consider in more detail, and while each of those portions is as important as the ones I have discussed, this brief review of some of the sections gives us enough of a feel for the kind of student learning and development that we hope our students experience and that we hope to enhance with our actions. It is, as our BYU aims document puts it, an educational experience that is “(1) spiritually strengthening, (2) intellectually enlarging, and (3) character building, leading to (4) lifelong learning and service.”22 One way to summarize this is to put some of the key principles from the mission statement and aims document into visual form. The mission statement indicates that each of our students should receive an education that is broad—one covering the arts, letters, and sciences. You might think of that as a line going across in a horizontal plane. The mission statement also indicates that, in addition, they should receive in-depth instruction in a specialized field of their choice. This T-shaped learning23 reflecting the breadth and depth of a good college education is similar to that offered by many other great universities. And while it is a necessary part of the unique educational experience we are to provide our students, it is not by itself sufficient to achieve our more ambitious aim of helping them realize their full divine potential. In order to do that, we have to ensure that the educational process is spiritually strengthening. Notice that this important component covers all the knowledge we are conveying. It is not an appendage to the general or specialized curriculum; it is an essential part of every aspect of the learning process. Finally, the education will not be complete until the key principles are cemented into the character of our students—until the learning becomes part of who they are. If we achieve the full aims of our mission, what starts out looking like the kind of education that is provided by other great universities takes on a distinctive and—eventually, I might suggest—unique shape: In a sense then, our own iconic symbol can convey the kind of unique educational experience we hope to provide to our students. We might say that the letter Y explains why—W-H-Y—we exist and what we hope to accomplish. The photograph of new freshmen forming the Y in today’s Universe then takes on new meaning, reminding us that the students are the Y and the why. Photography by Jaren Wilkey And now we reach the critical stage of the discussion—the portion that President Boyd K. Packer often calls the “therefore, what?” part.24 What do these concepts in the mission statement mean to each of us individually? What do I hope you take away from this meeting? There are two things in particular—both of them fairly simple but, I think, fairly impactful. First, I hope all will understand that each of us has a role to play in carrying out the mission that has been set for us by the BYU Board of Trustees. The mission statement assumes that all members of the BYU community will make their own contribution to the mission—not just at a secondary support level but also in the actual learning process. We tend to think of that domain as belonging exclusively to the faculty, but the mission statement makes it clear that not just formal instruction but all programs and all services “should make their own contribution.” And this contribution is not limited just to the indirect kind of contribution to learning that is made by keeping the classrooms clean and functional or providing food in between classes. Each individual is to make his or her own contribution directly to the kind of learning experience that leads to “the balanced development of the total person.”25 More of you than you realize may be involved in the intensive learning process. Speaking of his university experience, when he worked part-time on the grounds and cleaning crews, President Henry B. Eyring observed: Physics taught me to understand the changes occurring in the world at large. But the things I learned as a groundskeeper and a janitor were worth more in working with the Brethren. Among those is the expectation that you know your duty thoroughly, you do more than you’re asked, and you do it in a way that doesn’t stand out. 26 Second, once you realize you have a role, ask yourself repeatedly the key questions “What is that role?” and “How can I perform it better?” There are a variety of things that might be done to get answers to those questions. Let me suggest a couple. First, become more familiar with the mission statement. You have been provided with copies of it and the aims document today. I urge each of you to read it and to reread it, even if you have read it many times before. As you do so, consider ways in which what you do can enhance the student experience and then strive to do that better. Second—and this goes in tandem with rereading the mission and aims documents—seek inspiration. I firmly believe that through prayerful study you will receive insights that will improve not only your individual efforts but also, in some cases, the institution itself. I am convinced that many if not most of the ideas that will greatly improve the university in the coming years will not come from task forces impaneled by the central administration with a top-down agenda; instead they will come from individual departments, bringing to light concepts and practices that will benefit not just those departments or units but the entire university. Many of the current university-wide programs that benefit thousands of students originated in the minds and practices of individual faculty and staff. The potential results of these kinds of efforts are spelled out in the last sentence of the mission statement: We believe the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission can have a strong effect on the course of higher education and will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University’s influence in a world we wish to improve. 27 Note the difference in the two key verbs. The earnest pursuit of this mission can have a positive impact on the course of higher education. I believe it likely that some of the ideas we generate here will ripple throughout other universities in positive ways. But the mission statement describes that impact only in terms of possibilities. By contrast, the other result of our earnest pursuit of this inspired mission seems more certain. It “will greatly enlarge” the influence of the university, not just in the realm of higher education but also in the world at large. Let me cite one of many examples I could give of how this may occur. This particular example also demonstrates how some of the distinctive ways in which we do things prepares our graduates to compete “with the best in their fields,” as the mission statement challenges us to do. A year ago a story in the New York Times Magazine—headlined “When Hollywood Wants Good, Clean Fun, It Goes to Mormon Country”—highlighted the work of the BYU Center for Animation, which operates under the direction of three colleges: the Ira A. Fulton College of Engineering and Technology, the College of Fine Arts and Communications, and the College of Physical and Mathematical Sciences. The author of the article, Jon Mooallem, first described the type of animated short films that BYU students have produced during the last fourteen years. He then stated: Those films have consistently racked up student Emmys and student Academy Awards. They’ve played at Cannes and Sundance. Most important, they’ve impressed recruiters. Out of nowhere, BYU—a Mormon university owned and operated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—has become a farm team for the country’s top animation studios and effects companies. Unlikely as it sounds, young Mormons are being sucked out of the middle of Utah and into the very centers of American pop-culture manufacturing.28 Now he might have said they are prepared to compete “with the best in their fields”—the terms used in the mission statement. Mooallem continued, describing what I would call the influence these graduates can have on the world: The BYU program is designed to be a . . . kind of ethical counterweight: it’s trying to unleash values-oriented filmmakers into the industry who can inflect its sensibility. “Without being preachy about it,” [Professor R. Brent] Adams told me, “if we can add something to the culture that makes people think about being better human beings—more productive, more kind, more forgiving—that’s what we want to do.”29 Mooallem continued: At first I struggled to understand the specifics of that mission. Everyone talked about wanting to make “clean movies” or “movies I wouldn’t be afraid to take my mother to,” but these phrases were shibboleths, loaded and tough to pin down. It wasn’t simply a matter of avoiding sex and violence. . . . There was, instead, a fixation on whether you walked away from the movie feeling uplifted. That question superseded everything, even the usual genre and age-demographic lines.30 The world—at least the animation world—is noticing the difference. Mooallem went on to say: The industry has found a new breed of employee in Utah. One recruiter from Sony Animation Pictures described the typical BYU grad as . . . equipped with “a different mind-set.” In most animation programs, each student leads production on his or her own film. But at BYU, everyone works as a team on a single film because, unlike at art schools, students are too busy with religion courses and other requirements to be full-time filmmakers. Out of necessity, production on each year’s film winds up mirroring the way the industry actually works. BYU students emerge committed to a specialty and to collaboration—prepared for an entry-level job. 31 Notice how our distinctiveness, religion courses, and “other requirements”—which might include ward or family responsibilities—caused the BYU Animation Center to do things in a different way that turns out to be a better way. Returning to the story: “Honestly,” says Marilyn Friedman, the former head of outreach at DreamWorks, who visited BYU frequently, “the first few times I went to Provo, I was like: What am I doing here? I’m a little Jewish girl from back East. But I was just amazed by how absolutely lovely those kids are. They couldn’t be nicer, humbler, more respectful. It’s a pleasure. And when they come here, they stay that way.”32 The author of the article added: Many of the students I met in Provo grew up in insular Mormon communities. They came from what’s dismissed as flyover country. They don’t smoke or drink, and I noticed that one faculty member, for example, kept saying, “Holy schnikeys!” whenever he wanted to curse. And yet creative types in Hollywood kept raving to me about how much “more worldly” these Mormons were than the moody, Gen Y art-school grads coming out of New York and Los Angeles and how grateful they were to have them onboard. This cut against so many different stereotypes—of Mormons, of Hollywood, of tortured artsy kids—and at the oddest angles. By coincidence, it seemed, Mormon culture was grooming its young people to be ideal employees of the same industry it predisposed them to be wary of.33 Mooallem concluded with an observation that may prove prophetic: I kept being reminded that BYU’s program was only 13 years old: most of the moral emissaries that it has been pouring into the industry are still climbing to the positions from which they’ll be able to truly influence a film’s tone and content. One day there will be alumni directing and producing, students insisted—it’s an inevitability. “Right now we’re the workhorses,” an alumnus at DreamWorks told me. “But I think our future is bright in terms of being able to shape the industry.”34 What an example of how “the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission . . . will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University’s influence in a world we wish to improve.” I close with observations about two key parts of the first sentence of the mission statement that I rushed by in my earlier remarks. I skipped them not because they are not important but precisely because they are, and I wanted to highlight them. First, note that even though the mission statement focuses on students, the broad mission of the university is to assist “individuals” in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Given the student-centric nature of the mission statement and the educational enterprise in which we are engaged, I would have expected that phrase to read, “assist studentsin their quest for perfection and eternal life.” But the mission statement uses the broader term individuals. To me this suggests that while our efforts ought to be focused on the students and what happens to them, the results of that focus may assist others in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Let me cite as one example the experience of one of our lesser-known founders. I must confess that until I had an office on the third floor of the ASB, I thought that Karl G. Maeser was the first academic leader of this institution. While Maeser is rightly credited with being one of its key founders, he was not the first principal of Brigham Young Academy, as many of you know. I learned this early in my tenure as advancement vice president when I walked down the hall and saw pictures of the presidents of BYU ending with President Cecil O. Samuelson but beginning, much to my surprise, not with Karl G. Maeser but with Warren Dusenberry, who was the principal of Brigham Young Academy during what was called its experimental term from January 3, 1876, to April 15 of that year—a period of only four months, not much longer than I have been in office. Warren Dusenberry was born in 1836 in Pennsylvania.35 When he was five years old, his family moved to an area near Hannibal, Missouri, where, five years later, his mother, Aurilla, joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His father, Mahlon, did not join his wife in that action, and neither did Warren or his brother Wilson. In April 1860, when Warren was twenty-three years old, the Dusenberry family made their way to California. After two years there, Aurilla and Mahlon reached the breaking point over religion, and she left for Utah with Warren, Wilson, and their two sisters.36 Mahlon’s instruction to his son Wilson was to keep himself “free from the curse of Mormonism.”37 Although he was not a member of the Church, Warren’s first job in Provo was as a teacher in the First Ward School, with classes conducted in the basement of the original tabernacle.38 Focusing as he did on the well-being of the students, Warren invested fifty dollars of his own money to buy textbooks for the first school.39 Wilson sometimes substituted for his brother and recorded in his journal some of what he called the “botherations”40 of teaching in a pioneer town. After one particularly trying day, he wrote, “The little brats were determined on having a spree. [I] checked their cheer a little, however.”41 In the fall of 1863 the brothers decided to start their own school, which in later years many viewed as the real predecessor of Brigham Young Academy. The brothers were “the only teachers, administrators, and janitors”42 of the new Dusenberry School. The finances were so tight that they were forced to live at the school, at first sleeping on the floor.43 When after several months they acquired a bed, Wilson recorded his one-word reaction in his journal: “Wonderful!” 44 The financial strain eventually grew too heavy, and the brothers closed the school after two years.45 The school reopened four years later in 1869,46 and shortly thereafter it became the Timpanogos Branch of the University of Deseret, with Warren operating as the principal.47 The school stayed afloat for six years, until financial problems once again caused the school to go under in 1875. It was in April of that year that Wilson wrote a letter to Brigham Young informing him that they could not go on without some additional financial help.48 In response, President Young informed them that he would not sustain their school because he had decided to endow a new institution of learning, and Warren set to work drawing up some plans.49 In the fall of 1875 President Young established Brigham Young Academy, and Warren was appointed as its first principal.50 The appointment was from the outset intended to be temporary, as Warren had over time become involved in other activities.51 As planned, he resigned after the 1876 spring experimental term to make way for Karl G. Maeser.52 Warren and Wilson Dusenberry dedicated eight years of their lives to the education of youth in Provo, sacrificing their means, their time, and their comfort “toward the balanced development of the total person.” As Warren and Wilson focused on the well-being of their students, their attitude toward them changed. Whereas early on Wilson described the students as “botherations” and “brats” whose cheer needed to be checked, he later recorded, “Who can teach school without forming ties of affection? Not I.”53 The Dusenberrys’ capacity to take joy from seeing students grow had increased because of their focus on the well-being of their students. But their association with the students and others in the community had an even more fundamental impact on them. On July 24, 1864, during their first year of teaching in Provo, Warren told Wilson that he was ready to be baptized, and both of them were—on that very day.54 Among those individuals whose quest for perfection and eternal life were aided by the educational efforts of Warren and Wilson Dusenberry, none was affected more profoundly than the Dusenberrys themselves. That may be the case with us as well. The “individuals” whose quest for perfection and eternal life is assisted by our efforts at BYU may include not only the students who attend here but also those who are changed by their interaction with those students now and in the future, including ourselves. Finally, there is the phrase in the mission statement that we too often completely skip over: “founded, supported, and guided by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.”55 As important as it is to remind ourselves constantly that students are the focus of our efforts, it is equally important to always remember the source of not only our founding and our funding but also our direction. We are blessed to be led by those who are prophets, seers, and revelators. It was the inspiration given to such individuals, starting with Brigham Young, that has brought us to this point. And it will be their inspiration and vision that will guide us in the future. We will fulfill our mission only to the extent that we accept and follow that guidance. As the mission statement says, “To succeed in this mission the university must provide an environment enlightened by living prophets.”56 Along the way, those living prophets have provided us glimpses of the destiny of this place. You are familiar with them from Brigham Young and John Taylor and onward. I close with one of my favorites, from President Spencer W. Kimball: I am both hopeful and expectant that from this university there will rise brilliant stars in drama, literature, music, art, science, and all the scholarly graces. This university can be the refining host for many such individuals who in the future, long after they have left this campus, can lift and inspire others around the globe. . . . As previous First Presidencies have said, we say again to you: “We expect—we do not merely hope—that Brigham Young University will become a leader among the great universities of the world.” To that expectation I would add, “Remain a unique university in all the world!” Then, in the process of time, this truly will become the fully recognized university of the Lord about which so much has been spoken in the past.57 May we go forward in this great cause with energy, enthusiasm, and inspiration. I bear my witness that Heavenly Father is aware of our efforts. He is interested in our efforts, both for our benefit and for that of our students. If we will but focus in on what our mission is, we will be blessed to raise the stature of the university and, more important, affect the lives of thousands of our students. I bear you that witness in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> All of us view events through particular paradigms or lenses. If the lenses are accurate, the paradigm enhances our understanding and knowledge. If they are distorted, we sometimes make mistakes, which causes a paradigm shift. In 1962, Thomas Kuhn published a book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, in which he set forth his view that development in scientific knowledge did not progress in a linear, continuous fashion but rather through periodic radical changes in the framework through which scientific questions are considered. Kuhn called these radical changes “paradigm shifts.”1 While the validity of Kuhn’s theory has been extensively debated in the last fifty years, there is little dispute that his book brought the terms paradigm shift and paradigm into popular culture. Today, dictionaries broadly define a paradigm as “a philosophical or theoretical framework.”2 It is a set of principles or ideas that provides a particular way of interpreting events. One textbook explains: A paradigm is . . . a way of thinking about or viewing the world. . . . A paradigm is like the lens on a pair of glasses. . . . If you put on red glasses, everything looks red. If you put on pink glasses, the world looks pink. If you put on yellow glasses, everything around you looks more yellow.3 All of us view events through particular paradigms or lenses. If the lenses are accurate, the paradigm enhances our understanding and knowledge. If they are distorted, we sometimes make mistakes, which causes a paradigm shift. Let me illustrate with a short video. [The video portrayed a conversation between two men over a ship radio arguing who will change course. The ship’s captain insists the other change his course to avoid collision, only to find out the other voice is speaking from a lighthouse.4] Now that is what you might call a paradigm shift. There have always been competing paradigms in every discipline and, more important, in the overall cultures in which we live. This is especially evident in today’s society, in which people can view the same event and reach dramatically different conclusions, not only as to what the event means but even as to what actually happened. Given the confusion that these competing paradigms seem to engender, we are blessed to live in a time and situation in which we have modern-day revelation to provide a more complete and accurate framework in which all our lives’ events, both individually and globally, can be better understood. While these latter-day revelations in one sense have effectuated a remarkable paradigm shift in religious understanding, in another sense they are really a restoration of a paradigm or framework that God provided to His children from the beginning of time—a framework for understanding all the events in the world, from before its creation and extending through its future millennial season into the eternities. This framework or paradigm has various names. “In the scriptures God’s plan is called a merciful plan, the plan of happiness, the plan of redemption, and the plan of salvation.”5 As explained by Elder Dallin H. Oaks at the April 2017 general conference, this plan—God’s plan for His children—is quite simple, yet very profound. It answers humanity’s deepest questions and provides a framework for finding answers to our more individualized questions, both great and small. As Elder Oaks stated: Questions like “Where did we come from?” “Why are we here?” and “Where are we going?” are answered in what the scriptures call the “plan of salvation,” the “great plan of happiness,” or the “plan of redemption.” Elder Oaks then explained the simple principles that constitute this remarkable paradigm. As spirit children of God, in an existence prior to mortality, we desired a destiny of eternal life but had progressed as far as we could without a mortal experience in a physical body. To provide that opportunity, our Heavenly Father presided over the Creation of this world, where, deprived of our memory of what preceded our mortal birth, we could prove our willingness to keep His commandments and experience and grow through the other challenges of mortal life. But in the course of that mortal experience, and as a result of the Fall of our first parents, we would suffer spiritual death by being cut off from the presence of God, be soiled by sin, and become subject to physical death. The Father’s plan anticipated and provided ways to overcome all of those barriers [through the Atonement of His Son, Jesus Christ].6 Notice five simple points in Elder Oaks’s description of the plan: 1. We lived with Heavenly Father before this earth life. 2. He provided a plan for us to become like Him. 3. The world was created for that purpose. 4. The Fall of Adam and Eve was part of that plan; it allowed us to gain a body and experience mortality, both of which allow us to progress. 5. Christ, through His great and infinite atoning sacrifice, makes the plan fully operative, bringing to pass the Resurrection and making available the cleansing, healing, and sanctifying power that in the eternities can perfect us. Most of us have heard this plan so many times that we may not fully appreciate how deep and significant it is. Moreover, when encountering our day-to-day experiences and trials, we too often take off the clarifying gospel lenses that these truths provide and then complain because the resulting distorted image does not seem correct. Similarly, we sometimes view the gospel through the paradigm of our fields of study without considering the benefits of doing the reverse. Failure to view our fields of study through the gospel paradigm can distort our understanding of both the gospel and our fields of study. As we begin a new year, let me make a ­suggestion—no, a promise—that if you will view all your experiences and questions, even academic questions, in light of God’s plan for us through the lenses of the gospel paradigm, three things will happen. First, you will more clearly understand gospel principles and the subjects you study. Second, you will respond more positively to life’s daily ups and downs. And, third, you will increase your ability to act courageously when challenges seem difficult, if not impossible. Let me expound on these three blessings. Blessing 1: You Will More Clearly Understand Gospel Principles and the Subjects You Study First, looking at life through the lens of the gospel paradigm helps you more clearly understand gospel principles and the subjects you study. The importance of placing all gospel principles in the light of the plan of salvation is illustrated in the Book of Mormon. When Ammon exhibited extraordinary courage and physical prowess by single-handedly saving King Lamoni’s servants and flocks from marauding robbers, it caused the king to have questions about Ammon and who he was. Specifically, the king asked Ammon, “Tell me by what power ye slew and smote off the arms of my brethren that scattered my flocks.”7 If I were in Ammon’s shoes, I might have thought to answer by explaining my awesome self-defense skills, my knowledge of sheep, or the behavior of bullies. Or, maybe in a more enlightened moment, I might have simply said, “God gave me power to do that work.” But Ammon didn’t do any of those things. Instead, after establishing what the king knew about God—what the king’s paradigm was, so to speak—Ammon provided a framework, or a new paradigm, that allowed him to answer the questions at a deeper and more accurate level. Ammon . . . began at the creation of the world . . . and told [the king] all the things concerning the fall of man. . . . But this is not all; for he expounded unto them the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world; and he also made known unto them concerning the coming of Christ, and all the works of the Lord did he make known unto them.8 In short, Ammon explained God’s plan for us—a plan prepared before the foundation of this world to help God’s children become like Him; a plan that included the creation of this world, the Fall of Adam and Eve, and the coming of Christ to make the plan fully operative in a perfect way. Understanding this framework or paradigm, the king was then in a position to fully understand both the answers to the questions he had posed and also the other key principles and commandments Ammon would share with him. By establishing an overarching paradigm before explaining specific principles or commandments, Ammon was following a pattern9 set by Heavenly Father with Adam and Eve. The prophet Alma the Younger noted, “God gave unto [Adam and Eve] commandments, after having made known unto them the plan of redemption.”10 Once we understand the overall plan, it is easier to understand and obey the commandments. Without that larger clarifying paradigm, commandments can too often be seen as arbitrary rules or regulations that confine and restrict us. With that framework in place, however, we see more clearly and come to understand that God’s commandments are designed to enable us to expand our souls in ways that permit us to become like Him, which is the ultimate goal of His plan for us.11 As a simple example, some may wonder why we pay tithing. One response is to explain it as a financial commandment whose primary function is to teach us good budgeting principles and provide funds for the Church. However, while those may be secondary benefits of our adherence to the commandment, its primary purpose, like that of all commandments, is to help us implement God’s plan in our lives. I once heard President Henry B. Eyring describe what he called “the Lord’s law of finance.”12 The first principle is simple. God owns everything. However, He deposits much of His goods in bank accounts He creates with each of us. He does so for a specific purpose: to help us become like Him. Paying tithing increases our faith and trust in Him and His promises, and it helps us become more concerned with others rather than with ­ourselves—both of which help us become more like God. The clarity that comes from viewing commandments through the gospel lens extends beyond the law of tithing to other important gospel teachings and current topics, such as the nature of the Godhead13 and the definition and purpose of marriage,14 as Elder Oaks has explained in recent talks. When we encounter questions about these or other issues—questions from others or questions from ourselves—the best way to find a good answer is to begin, as did Ammon, with a review of God’s eternal plan of happiness. Blessing 2: You Will Respond More Positively to the Ups and Downs of Daily Life Second, viewing events through the lens of the gospel paradigm not only sheds clarifying light on the teachings and policies of the Church but also helps us respond more positively to the ups and downs of daily life that each of us inevitably face. When Laman and Lemuel encountered such challenges, they murmured. In 1 Nephi 2:12 we read that they murmured so much “because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them.” They did not view events in their daily life as part of God’s plan for them. Without an understanding of the plan, even life’s smallest inconveniences can lead to deep discontent and grumbling. On the other hand, viewing life’s events through the gospel paradigm can change the entire nature of unpleasant events. Let me illustrate with an experience shared by President Henry B. Eyring about his father, Henry Eyring. To appreciate this story, you have to realize that it occurred when [my father] was nearly eighty and had bone cancer. He had bone cancer so badly in his hips that he could hardly move. . . . Dad was the senior high councilor in his stake with the responsibility for the welfare farm. An assignment was given to weed a field of onions, so Dad assigned himself to go work on the farm. Dad never told me how hard it was, but . . . [one man who was there] said that the pain was so great that Dad was pulling himself along on his stomach with his elbows. . . . The pain was too great for him to kneel. Everyone who has talked to me [about that day] has remarked how Dad smiled and laughed and talked happily with them as they worked in that field of onions. Now, this is the joke Dad told me on himself afterward. He said he was there at the end of the day. After all the work was finished and the onions were all weeded, someone asked him, “Henry, good heavens! You didn’t pull those weeds, did you? Those weeds were sprayed two days ago, and they were going to die anyway.” Dad just roared [with laughter]. He thought that was the funniest thing. He thought it was a great joke on himself. He had worked through the day in the wrong weeds. They had been sprayed and would have died anyway. When Dad told me this story, I knew how tough it was. So I said to him, “Dad, how could you make a joke out of that? How could you take it so pleasantly?” He said something to me that I will never forget, and I hope you won’t. He said, “Hal, I wasn’t there for the weeds.” [President Eyring concluded:] Now, you’ll be in an onion patch much of your life. So will I. . . . But you didn’t come for the weeds.15 If we will view our daily experiences in the light of the gospel paradigm, we will find joy in unexpected ways and we will discover why God’s plan is called the plan of happiness. Blessing 3: You Will Increase Your Ability to Act Courageously Third, viewing events through the lens of the gospel paradigm—in the light of the plan of ­salvation—will increase our ability to act courageously when life’s challenges seem overwhelming. Let me illustrate with a personal example shared by Elder Oaks in his book Life’s Lessons Learned. Elder Oaks’s father died when Elder Oaks was young, leaving his mother as a young widow with three small children. Elder Oaks described the situation this way: [When I was seven years old my] family was happily [living] in Twin Falls, Idaho, where my father’s medical practice . . . was thriving. . . . After years of sacrifice . . . , my mother could at last contemplate a life of security as the wife of a prosperous physician. . . . . . . In the fall of 1939 my father was diagnosed with tuberculosis and hospitalized at a TB sanatorium in Denver, Colorado. . . . He died there . . . , leaving my mother struggling with a question that has troubled many faithful Latter-day Saints. [Why was he not healed?] During the six months of his hospitalization, my father had received many priesthood blessings containing promises of recovery. . . . Again and again prominent priesthood leaders . . . went to my father’s bedside and gave priesthood blessings that contained promises of healing. Each of these leaders rebuked the disease and commanded that my father be made whole. [But he still died.]16 Imagine how difficult that must have been for Elder Oaks’s mother. But the story continues. Elder Oaks indicated that six months after his father’s death, his mother, anxious to qualify herself to earn a living for her three children, . . . left [the children] in Utah with her parents and traveled to New York City to pursue a master’s degree at Columbia University. This proved to be too soon. The loneliness resulting from this separation from her family so soon after the loss of her husband, combined with the rigors of graduate study, strained her beyond the breaking point. . . . She suffered what was then called a nervous breakdown.17 If anyone had cause to murmur and complain about life’s unfairness, it was Sister Oaks. But she understood God’s plan and chose to view events in her life through the lens of that plan. Elder Oaks reported that “with faith and priesthood blessings . . . , [his mother soon] was able to resume her [employment] and unassisted parenting.”18 And her ability to maintain an eternal perspective through all this experience made a deep impression on her young son. As Elder Oaks put it: My faithful widowed mother had no confusion about the eternal nature of the family relationship. She always honored the position of our faithful deceased father. She made him a presence in our home. She spoke of the eternal duration of their temple marriage and of our destiny to be together as a family in the next life. She often reminded us of what our father would like us to do so we could qualify for the Savior’s promise that we could be a family forever.19 Sister Oaks’s teachings were extraordinarily effective. Elder Oaks illustrated their impact on him with a personal story: As a 12-year-old deacon, I was pleased to accompany the bishop to deliver Christmas baskets to the widows of our ward in Vernal, Utah. The backseat of his car was filled with baskets of grapefruit and oranges. . . . He waited in the car while I took a basket to each door and said, “The bishop asked me to give you this Christmas basket from the ward.” When we had delivered all the baskets but one, the bishop drove me home. There he handed me the last ­basket and said, “This is for your mother.” Before I could reply, he drove away. . . . I stood in front of our house, snowflakes falling on my face, holding the basket and wondering. We had been delivering baskets to widows, but I had never thought of my mother as a widow. . . . I wondered why anyone would think my mother was a widow.20 Elder Oaks remembered: [My mother] never referred to herself as a widow, and it never occurred to me that she was. To me, as a boy growing up, she wasn’t a widow. She had a husband and we had a father. He was just away for a while.21 Elder Oaks said that his mother “always taught us that we had a father and she had a husband and that we would always be a family because of their temple marriage.”22 What a powerful example of the perspective and power that comes from viewing life’s challenges through the lens of the gospel paradigm. Viewing our lives and the events around us in the light of God’s plan for us will increase our understanding of gospel principles and other things we study, it will help us find joy in life’s daily challenges, and it will enable us to meet the most difficult challenges, even those that seem overwhelming. That is the way God ordained it to be under His perfect plan. I testify that God lives. He is literally our Father in Heaven. And He has a perfect plan of ­happiness for each of us. That plan is possible because of Jesus Christ. Christ is the key to the plan of salvation, the key to the plan of redemption—that is why we call Him Savior and Redeemer. I testify that He fulfills that role perfectly in ways that will bless our lives immeasurably if we will but trust Him. I so testify in His holy name, even Jesus Christ, amen. <start> A junior high school student was once having problems learning math. His teacher struggled with him day after day and assigned him extra work to do each evening. The student would always return the next morning with the assignment uncompleted. After this had gone on for some time, the teacher vented his frustration by asking the student in an irritated tone, “What is it with you? Are you really ignorant or just apathetic?” The student casually shrugged his shoulders and replied, “I don’t know, and I don’t care.” I am going to talk today about knowing and caring, the relationship between those two concepts, and what that relationship means to us at this university. My starting point is a passage from the New Testament—1 Corinthians 8. In this portion of his epistle to the members of the Church in Corinth, Paul is answering a series of questions apparently put to him by the Saints in an earlier communication. Chapter 8 specifically addresses the propriety of eating meat that has been offered as sacrifice to idols. A bit of background concerning this practice helps us understand both the nature of the Corinthian inquiry and the true significance of Paul’s response. The sacrifice of animals to the pantheon of Greek and Roman gods was a well-established part of Greco-Roman life long before Paul arrived in Corinth.1 At the time Paul was writing, such sacrifices were performed not only for purely religious occasions, but also at state festivals and various private functions, such as birthday and wedding celebrations.2 Thus, as Bible scholar Richard B. Hays explained: For those few Corinthian Christians who were among the wealthier class . . . , their public and professional duties virtually required the networking that occurred through attending and sponsoring such events. To eat the sacrificial meat served on such occasions was simple social courtesy; to refuse to share in the meal would be an affront to the host.3 Many scholars agree that this group of more educated, socially conscious Corinthian Church members was the likely source of the inquiry to which Paul was responding in chapter 8.4 Being familiar with these customs, Paul addresses the propriety of eating meat sacrificed to idols from two perspectives: that of knowing and that of caring—or, to use his terms, knowledge and charity. The former is the perspective apparently taken by the Saints who made the inquiry; the latter seems to be the one Paul hopes to persuade them to consider. As several scholars have suggested, Paul seems to restate the contention of the Corinthian inquirers concerning what knowledge teaches them about the issue and then to respond to their position from the perspective of charity.5 Using the perspective of knowledge, Paul states: We all have knowledge. . . . As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one. For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth . . . , But to us there is but one God, the Father. . . . But meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are we the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse. [1 Corinthians 8:1, 4–6, 8] In other words, Paul acknowledges—at least for the sake of his response—that the Corinthian inquirers “know” that the idols to whom the meat is sacrificed are not real, that there is but one true God whom they worship, and that it does not really matter whether the meat has been prepared as part of what is essentially a meaningless ritual. It is still meat. Thus the “knowledge” that the Corinthian inquirers possessed had freed them—at least in their eyes—to make an enlightened choice about whether to eat the meat sacrificed at these social occasions. This part of Paul’s response would undoubtedly have pleased many of his more educated inquirers, because it placed such a high premium on knowledge orgnosis, to use the Greek term. There were few, if any, things in Greek culture that exceeded gnosis in importance. Thus, as Hays observed, the Corinthian inquirers might well have thought that “the strong Christian, armed with the appropriate gnosis, can go without compunction to the pagan temple and eat whatever is offered there; indeed, doing so may be a way to demonstrate one’s spiritual maturity and freedom.”6 Further, Hays theorizes the inquirers “probably appealed to Paul to set the record straight by encouraging the weak to overcome their qualms and enter the world of spiritual freedom enjoyed by those who possess gnosis.”7 If that was in fact the motive of the Corinthian inquirers, they were to be sorely disappointed by Paul’s response, which highlighted the difference between the perspective of knowledge they had adopted and the perspective of charity Paul advocated. Without contesting the correctness of what the Corinthian Saints knew, Paul invited them to look at the issue from another point of view. Paul first reminds them, in chapter 8, that “there is not in every man that knowledge” and that “some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an idol” (v. 7). He then warns them to “take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak” (v. 9), explaining that if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols; And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died? [vv. 10–11] Paul thus appeals to the Corinthians who thought they had full knowledge concerning the subject to consider the impact of their actions on their fellow Saints. Although the “educated” might well understand that there was no religious significance to the consumption of meat offered to dumb idols, others might not have the same knowledge, and seeing the well-educated Saints eating at the idol’s temple, these so-called “weaker” Saints might well assume that there was something to this idol worship. Thus the knowledge of the inquiring Corinthian members of the Church might lead to the destruction of their fellow Saints for whom Christ had given his life. Given the differences in these two perspectives, Paul informs the Saints of the course that he will follow: “Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend,8 I will eat no flesh while the world standeth” (v. 13). Having the perspectives given by both knowledge and charity, Paul apparently opts for the course indicated by the latter. He seems to be saying that although knowledge may teach that one can eat meat offered to idols without incurring any spiritual damage, charity demonstrates that such conduct may constitute a “sin . . . against the brethren” (v. 12). Given that choice, Paul not surprisingly decides that he will eat no meat offered to idols, even if he “knows” in one sense that it does not really matter whether or not he does. Although Paul saves his personal resolution of the issue until the last verse of chapter 8, he had clearly indicated to the inquirers where he was headed with his summary of the matter in verse 1 when, in answer to their assertion that “we all have knowledge,”9 he stated, “Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.” Paul’s message at this point seems fairly clear. He appears to be saying that having charity is much more important than having knowledge. Indeed, he seems to imply that the two are polar opposites. Knowledge artificially inflates or puffs up one’s selfish ego and leads one to “sin . . . against the brethren, and . . . against Christ” (v. 12). Charity, on the other hand, edifieth, or, to use the Greek term oikodomeo, “builds up” or “strengthens” the entire community of Saints.10 Given this seemingly clear message, we at a university dedicated to the acquisition and advancement of knowledge must pause somewhat and ask ourselves two questions. First, is it possible that caring is that important? And second, is it possible that knowing is that harmful? Let’s consider each of these questions in turn. First, is caring, or charity, that important? The scriptures amply demonstrate that the answer to that question is an unequivocal yes. Paul himself addresses the issue in words that are familiar to us all: Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. [1 Corinthians 13:1–2] The ancient American prophet Mormon picks up the theme in words recorded by his son, Moroni: “Wherefore, my beloved brethren, if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all” (Moroni 7:46). Nephi made a similar observation when he said, “The Lord God hath given a commandment that all men should have charity. . . . And except they should have charity they were nothing” (2 Nephi 26:30). In his abridgement of the Jaredite record, Moroni sums up the matter, stating that “except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which [Christ] hast prepared in the mansions of [his] Father” (Ether 12:34). Clearly, charity is very important. In fact, it is essential to our exaltation. Without it we are nothing compared to what we could be. It is the “very core” of the gospel,11 the very core of the exalted life to which we all aspire. Thus far, Paul’s apparent message to the Corinthians seems to be right on target. Charity is that important. But, turning to the second question, is it also true that knowledge pales by comparison, that it is indeed harmful because it inevitably gets in the way of charity, as Paul seems to suggest? To put it more bluntly, are we all wasting our time here at this university where we are expected to expend so much effort in studying and acquiring knowledge? Isn’t it enough if we just learn to be really nice to everyone? Again, scriptural and prophetic statements supply the answer—but this time the response is an emphatic no. The Doctrine and Covenants informs us that “it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance” (D&C 131:6). Similarly, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that “a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity.”12 Furthermore, the knowledge we are to acquire is not limited to what we might narrowly classify as religious matters. In section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord instructs us to learn of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms. [D&C 88:79] This sounds like a description of general education courses at most universities. It therefore appears that both charity and knowledge are important—indeed, that both are essential to our exaltation. So why does Paul seem to go to such great lengths to disparage knowledge in his response to the Corinthians’ inquiry about eating meat offered to idols? Why does he not simply inform them that it is not the charitable thing to do and, therefore, not advisable? The answer, I believe, is that Paul wanted to teach the Corinthian Saints about more than the propriety of eating meat offered to idols. He wanted to teach them something about knowledge and its relationship to charity. It seems that the Corinthian inquirers had confused awareness of factual information with complete knowledge. Paul does not dispute the fact that idols are not real or that there is only one true God. But mere awareness of these factual realities—which the Corinthians apparently thought constituted complete knowledge of the matter—was only a partial or incomplete knowledge, a kind of knowledge that puffs one up in an artificial way. Thus Paul warns the inquirers, “If any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know” (1 Corinthians 8:2). True knowledge does not puff up; it humbles. When we have true knowledge, we are not so much impressed by all that we know as we are humbled by all that still remains for us to learn. Accordingly, if we think we know everything on a subject, it is a pretty good sign that we really know “nothing yet as [we] ought to know.” And Paul seems to indicate that the missing link—the element that transforms the mere accumulation of factual information into complete knowledge—is charity. To understand how this works, one might view factual information as isolated, random dots on a page. Knowledge consists of making connections between the dots in such a way that an ordered picture appears, as in a dot-to-dot puzzle. When we begin to see connections between the various bits of factual information we have at our disposal, we begin to acquire knowledge. However, if we do not consider the impact our actions and knowledge have on others, we will see neither all the dots on the page nor the multitude of connections that might be made to give more clarity and texture to the picture. The perspective of charity thus allows us to see things in a new and more complete way. It permits us to make connections that we would not otherwise make. The result is a more detailed, accurate picture of things—one that may differ as much from that produced by incomplete knowledge as a Rembrandt differs from a child’s simple stick-figure drawing. Charity can therefore provide the context in which our knowledge can become complete. It was only when the Corinthian inquirers began to place the facts they “knew” in the context of their impact on others—when they began to look at the matter from the viewpoint of charity—that they could begin to see that their knowledge was not as certain or complete as they had initially thought.13 Paul therefore seems to be teaching the Corinthian inquirers the same thing Peter taught the members of the early Church when he directed them to add to their knowledge “brotherly kindness” and “charity,” among other things (2 Peter 1:6–7). “For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ” (2 Peter 1:8). Although Peter may have been talking about a specific kind of knowledge, the lesson seems to apply to all learning. It is only when factual information is coupled with charity that it can be fully productive and complete; otherwise it too often remains mere awareness of “barren” and not fully connected items of data. Similarly, Paul seems to be saying not that knowledge is bad, but that it is unproductive, barren, and incomplete without charity. He seems to be saying there is some kind of critical relationship between knowledge and charity. And just what is that relationship? I confess at the outset that I do not have the complete answer to that question. But I do have some thoughts that I hope will lead you to consider more fully and accurately what that answer might be. First, I suggest that there is some kind of symbiotic relationship between knowledge and charity, that they feed one another, that the possession of knowledge helps us be more charitable, and that the attribute of charity helps us be more knowledgeable. Let me illustrate with a couple of simple examples. In a 1988 address to the Democratic National Convention, the Reverend Jesse Jackson told about his mother, “a working woman,” he said, who on “so many of the days . . . went to work early, with runs in her stockings.”14 He implied that others made fun of her because of the condition of her nylons. Although he does not elaborate, given the era and the coldheartedness of some human beings, one can imagine that some of her coworkers might well have whispered to one another behind her back, in tones just loud enough for her to hear, “Look at that dumb woman. She doesn’t even know enough to wear good stockings to work.” Apparently responding to such observations, Reverend Jackson stated, “She knew better, but she wore runs in her stockings so that my brother and I could have matching socks and not be laughed at at school.”15 A charitable act? Undoubtedly. And, I suggest, made more so by the fact that Reverend Jackson’s mother did indeed know what was proper work attire. Had she been completely unaware that wearing nylons with runs in them was not the style, her act, although still laudable, would not have been quite as selfless—not quite as charitable. Her knowledge of the way things were, though perhaps making her choice a bit more difficult, allowed her to exercise charity at a higher level than would have been possible had she been ignorant of the price she was being asked to pay. The same is true of our charitable offerings: When we see things as “they really are” (Jacob 4:13), we are in a position to give an even greater gift than when we see “through a glass, darkly” (1 Corinthians 13:12). Moreover, knowledge can make our charitable acts more productive and fruitful. Although all our hearts may go out to a person who has been deprived of sight, an ophthalmologist with knowledge of the workings of the human eye is in a much better position to do something about it. Jesus’ charitable compassion for the blind was made all the more powerful and productive because of his knowledge of the principles concerning how such defects could be cured.16 Knowledge can therefore both deepen charity and make it more productive. Conversely, charity can both deepen knowledge and make it more productive. This is demonstrated by the story of Bartolomé de Las Casas, who in 1514 was a rather ordinary 40-year-old Catholic priest living what was the typical gentlemanly life of a Spaniard on his estate in Cuba. Like many of his fellow countrymen in the Americas at the time, he owned ample land and numerous Indian slaves. Although he was a university graduate, he had not, up until that time, shown much interest in, or aptitude for, scholarly things. Fifty-two years later, when he died at the age of 92, Las Casas had become one of the greatest scholars of the Spanish empire, producing thousands of pages of materials, including works on law, history, anthropology, political theory, and theology.17 Moreover, Las Casas’ scholarship was as productive as it was extensive, and he became a vocal advocate of the Native American people. His scholarly reputation was such that when the king of Spain convened a conference in 1550 to consider the most pressing issue of the day—the manner in which the Spanish should deal with the indigenous population of the New World—Las Casas was one of only two scholars invited to debate the matter.18 What triggered this sudden outburst of scholarly productivity, this seemingly unquenchable search for knowledge? It was Las Casas’ arrival at the conclusion that the indigenous people of the New World were being treated unjustly and that they, of all people, were in need of the love of Christ. The way in which Las Casas arrived at that conclusion demonstrates how charity can transform awareness of factual information into the kind of deep and productive knowledge that only a lifetime of dedicated searching can produce. Shortly before Christmas in 1511, Las Casas was part of a congregation in Hispaniola that heard a stern sermon from the Dominican friar Antonio de Montesinos concerning the Spaniards’ mistreatment of the indigenous people. Although Las Casas remembered Montesinos’ words well enough to record them in a work he began more than 16 years later,19 they had no immediate impact on him. Las Casas “took no steps to change his way of life and for more than two years after the sermons continued to play the role of comfortable gentleman-ecclesiastic.”20 Without charity, Las Casas’ awareness of the plight of the Indians remained unconnected and isolated dots of information. He had, at best, incomplete knowledge of the matter. Yet something began to work within Las Casas once he began to view this information from the perspective of charity. While preparing a sermon to deliver at the Pentecostal mass at the newly established settlement of Sancti Espiritus in 1514, Las Casas came upon a verse from chapter 34 of Ecclesiasticus:21 Tainted his gifts who offers in sacrifice ill-gotten goods! . . . Like the man who slays a son in his father’s presence is he who offers sacrifice from the possessions of the poor. The bread of charity is life itself for the needy, he who withholds it is a person of blood. 22 These powerful words greatly affected Las Casas. As historian Lewis Hanke explains: Pondering on this text for several days and turning over in his mind the doctrines preached by the Dominicans, Las Casas became increasingly convinced “that everything done to the Indians thus far was unjust and tyrannical.” The scales fell from his eyes, he saw at last what was to be forever after the truth for him, and experienced as complete a change of life as did Saul of Tarsus on the road to Damascus.23 Once Las Casas viewed the information he had from this new perspective, previously unperceived connections began to appear everywhere. Thus he said, more than four decades later: Never have I read a book . . . all these interminable forty-four years, in which some argument or authority was not adduced to prove and corroborate the justice of these Indian peoples and to condemn the injustices and evils and harm done to them.24 The same charitable impulses also motivated Las Casas to make this more expanded knowledge productive. He not only preached the sermon at Sancti Espiritus, he immediately gave up his Indian slaves and embarked on a lifelong journey to acquire and use all the knowledge he could on behalf of the Indian people, making repeated arduous trips across the Atlantic to persuade the Crown to alter its policies toward them. Sparked by what he called “the charity of Jesus Christ, which knows no measure nor seeks any rest while on this pilgrimage,”25 Las Casas’ knowledge was both deepened and made more productive. Near the end of his life, Las Casas wrote: “For forty-eight years I have studied and sought to make clear the law; I believe, if I do not deceive myself, that I have penetrated to the pure waters of principle.”26 How many of us can say that we have worked hard enough on a subject that we have penetrated to “the pure waters of principle”? If we have not, perhaps we need to work as hard at acquiring more charity as we do at gathering more factual data. I do not mean to suggest by these simple examples that only those who are charitable can gain knowledge or that only those who are knowledgeable can have charity. It only takes one as brilliant and yet uncaring as the Unabomber to make it clear that the relationship is a little more complex than a one-to-one correlation between knowledge and charity. However, it is still possible to conclude that knowledge allows one to be more charitable than one otherwise could be and that charity can lead one to be more knowledgeable than one would have been in the absence of that attribute. Moreover—examples such as the Unabomber notwithstanding—it is still possible to conclude that one cannot possess full knowledge without charity and that one cannot possess full charity without knowledge. It may well be that the Savior’s atoning sacrifice—the epitome of charity—became possible only when he fully understood what was going to be required of him in order to carry out that sacrifice. Perhaps only when he completely realized the full measure of the pain he was being asked to bear was it possible for Christ to exercise the kind of pure love that constitutes full charity. And conversely, some aspects of the full knowledge the Savior possesses may have been obtained only because he had the charity required to make that atoning sacrifice. Perhaps his full understanding of how to succor each individual in each individual trial came about only as a result of the love that motivated him to shrink not from drinking even the dregs of that bitter cup. Indeed, the relationship between charity and knowledge may be even deeper than that. It may well be that charity is a large part of that which distinguishes knowledge from the more complete and divine attribute of intelligence, the attribute that makes God a god. As we at this university are well aware, the Lord states in the Doctrine and Covenants that “the glory of God is intelligence” and that intelligence is “light and truth” (D&C 93:36). The Lord also explains that “truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come” (D&C 93:24; emphasis added). And what is the light component of the equation? Although I am sure the matter is complex and that I am far from understanding it in even the most elementary way, I suggest that at least a portion of that light—a portion of the power by which all things exist (D&C 88:7–13)—is the divine attribute of charity. After the apostle John informed the Saints in his first epistle that “God is light” (1 John 1:5), he stated that “God is love” (1 John 4:8), using the Greek termagape, the same term that is translated as “charity” in 1 Corinthians,27 thereby suggesting some critical link between light and charity. Distinguishing intelligence from mere knowledge, Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated, “Knowledge can be obtained and used in unrighteousness. . . . But intelligence presupposes the wise and proper use of knowledge, a use that leads to righteousness and the ultimate attainment of exaltation.”28 Could any more wise, proper, and exalting use be made of knowledge than to effectuate a comprehensive atonement for all mankind, an act that was clearly motivated by charity, or “the pure love of Christ” (Moroni 7:47)?29 If charity is indeed an essential component of the intelligence equation, Elder McConkie’s observation that “the devil has tremendous power and influence because of his knowledge, but . . . is entirely devoid of the least glimmering of intelligence”30 could highlight the power implicit in the attribute of charity and explain why Paul, Mormon, and others view it as so critical. Seen from this perspective, the presence or absence of charity may be the key factor in determining whether our knowledge exalts us or condemns us. Regardless of the exact relationship between charity and knowledge on the one hand and intelligence, or light and truth, on the other, it is clear that charity and knowledge are both essential to our exaltation and that the two are related to each other in a profound way. The last thing I want to consider then is, What does all this mean to us at BYU today? Let me make three suggestions. First, as we engage in this lifelong process of acquiring knowledge, we should consider the impact our knowledge has on others, keeping in mind that our knowledge will likely be incomplete and unproductive if we do not view things from the perspective of charity. Bruce C. Hafen, a former dean of the BYU Law School, illustrated how incomplete knowledge can manifest itself when he wrote about the way some students react to the knowledge they acquire in law school. I have seen some of them try out their new intellectual tools in some context like a priesthood quorum or a Sunday School class. A well-meaning teacher will make a point they think is a little silly, and they will feel an irresistible urge to leap to their feet and pop the teacher’s bubble. If they are successful, they begin looking for other opportunities to point out the exception to any rule anybody can state. They begin to delight in cross-examination of the unsuspecting, just looking for somebody’s bubble up there floating around so that they can pop it with their shiny new pin of skepticism.31 When we begin to use knowledge in this way, we can rest assured that we have neither charity nor complete knowledge. The acquisition of both will be enhanced if we remind ourselves of the need for caring and humility in our educational endeavors. Second, even though the acquisition of knowledge is properly a major focus of our lives, we should make equal efforts to acquire charity. It requires just as much energy and perseverance to acquire charity as it does to obtain knowledge. It requires that we “keep the commandments of God,” as King Benjamin told his people, for such actions cause us to “be filled with love towards God and all men” (Mosiah 2:4). Moreover, according to Mormon, it requires that we pray “with all the energy of heart, that [we] may be filled with this love” (Moroni 7:48), for, ultimately, charity, like knowledge, is a gift from God (see 1 Corinthians 12:8, D&C 46:18). Third, in order to make the knowledge we acquire more productive and to increase our charity, I suggest we look for ways to use the knowledge we have to help others and that we regularly do so without monetary remuneration. After making clear the need to develop charity, Nephi observes that if we “labor for money [we] shall perish” (2 Nephi 26:31). This implies that we can never fully develop charity nor make our knowledge fully productive if we do things for others only when we expect monetary compensation in return. My colleague Cole Durham once told me of an important lesson he learned about such things from Lowell Bennion, who at the time was the director of the LDS institute of religion at the University of Utah. When Cole was growing up, his father suffered from multiple sclerosis. Cole’s father was able to provide for his family because he was a lawyer, but there were still some things his physical limitations prevented him from doing. On one occasion, when Brother Bennion saw that the Durham house was in need of a new coat of paint, he offered to perform the task, knowing that Cole’s father was physically unable to do so. After working long hours, Brother Bennion finished the job. As he was cleaning up, Cole’s father asked him, “How much do I owe you, Lowell?” “You don’t owe me anything,” came the reply. Cole’s father protested, “But we can afford to pay.” Brother Bennion kindly responded, “But I couldn’t afford to do it for money.” I suggest that all of us would do well to adopt that same principle—that we all commit to use the knowledge we acquire to help others, and that at times we do so without payment. Among lawyers there is a professional obligation to provide a certain amount of pro bono, or free, legal work each year. Although I admit there are a number of lawyers who do not fulfill this obligation and an even larger number who do so grudgingly, a personal commitment to provide pro bono service would be appropriate for all of us, regardless of the occupation we choose. On one occasion when we were discussing the lawyer’s obligation to perform pro bono work, one law student resisted the notion by stating, “Why should we have to provide services for free? No one expects the local grocer to give away groceries for free.” Although no one may expect it, nothing prevents anyone, including grocers and others, from providing their services and their knowledge for free. For nearly 40 years a man I know and respect greatly operated a store in the coal-mining community of Price, Utah. The store was somewhat akin to a general store, stocking everything from hardware and hunting equipment to furniture and fishing poles and plenty of toys at Christmas. When the store closed on Christmas Eve, there were sometimes toys, bikes, and other goods that had earlier been placed on layaway that had still not been retrieved, often because those who, a month or two earlier, had hoped to give these items as gifts had discovered there was simply no money to pay for them. On numerous occasions this man made a detour or two on his way home on Christmas Eve to anonymously drop off items that would never be paid for but that would also never be forgotten. Such acts and such an attitude are critical components of charity and, I suggest, of true knowledge. We should always remember that we need to know and we need to care. And we need to know and care in the most profound ways if we are to succeed in what is our ultimate purpose in this life. We should realize that such deep knowledge and charity come about only as a result of hard work on our part, work we should be anxiously engaged in at this university. But just as important, we need to remember that all this is possible only because someone else cared in the most profound way. Charity, after all, is “the pure love of Christ” (Moroni 7:47). Without his love, and the atoning sacrifice that it produced, we truly would be nothing. Knowledge of that fact is the most important knowledge we can have because it becomes the building block and the motivating factor for all other important knowledge we can acquire. May we ever strive to be like him—perfect in both knowledge and charity—is my prayer, in the name of our Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen. And so we look forward to the coming year with optimism, knowing that as we become a vibrant and dedicated community of learners and lifters, we will truly assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life. It is wonderful to see you all here this ­morning and to feel the joy, warmth, and enthusiasm you radiate. I count it as one of the great blessings of my life that I have the opportunity to associate daily with such ­talented, consecrated people whose main focus is to provide our students with the kind of holistic learning experience that President Spencer W. Kimball called “education for eternity.”1 I am grateful beyond words to each of you for your efforts in that remarkable and remarkably rewarding enterprise. I don’t think that anyone who has heard me speak this last year will be surprised that this year’s annual university conference theme—“Assist Individuals in Their Quest for Perfection and Eternal Life”—is a line from our mission statement.2 That deeply rich foundational document was the central focus of my remarks at this conference last year, and I have tried to mention it (if not make it the main theme) in the many speaking opportunities I have had since then. Given that effort, I couldn’t help but occasionally wonder if my almost obsessive emphasis on the mission statement was having any impact. Was anyone listening? Did anyone care? Such inquiries usually end up being ­rhetorical. But on occasion, heaven provides small but encouraging indications that the message is getting through—though sometimes in the most unexpected ways and in the most unanticipated places. I suppose many of you have already seen this clip from a tele­vision show last month, but because it gives me a little boost every time I see it, I hope you don’t mind indulging me in showing one more time the segment of Jeopardy! that aired on July 23, 2015.3 [The video clip was shown.] Who knew that attendance at last year’s annual university conference would be ­preparation for a final Jeopardy! question? Given the answers of the first two contestants, maybe I should have given some emphasis to spelling and considered adding a veterinarian program to the university. In any event, I appreciate the publicity that the show gave to what is our unique mission to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life. In this last year we have seen some of the fruits of our long-term efforts to achieve that and the other goals set forth in the mission statement. Those who arrived early at this session may have seen several examples in the pre-conference presentation on the beautiful new video display boards overhead. In fact, the video display boards themselves are partial fulfillment of one aspect of our mission. The mission statement challenges us to provide “a stimulating setting” in which our students can pursue “the full realization of human potential.”4 The display boards will certainly make it easier for those who attend events here to be more fully immersed in and uplifted by the many different kinds of activities that occur here, from concerts to basketball games to performances and devotionals. All will be more stimulating, thanks to the efforts of those who made the acquisition and installation of the video boards possible. Let me also note the new seats in which you are seated. There is no explicit reference to comfort in the mission statement, but surely the kind of learning that we hope occurs in this building will be enhanced by the fact that those who attend can focus on the words of the speakers or the skill of the performers and not on avoiding the embarrassment that comes from placing your knees into the back of the person in front of you or worrying about whether you will need to schedule a visit to your chiropractor because of the contortions required to fit into the allotted space. I extend my personal appreciation to Physical Facilities, OIT, Special Events, and all the other organizations that in a very short window between Women’s Conference and August commencement provided an extreme makeover and greatly extended the life of this most important gathering place on our campus. It was truly a heroic effort by so many. Equally impressive and equally impactful were the efforts of our physical facilities and grounds crew personnel to complete the second phase of our Campus Drive redesign, rendering the campus more beautiful, more pedestrian friendly, and overall more conducive to the kind of life-changing experience we hope our students have here. I also express appreciation to all of you who soldiered on through the construction delays and detours during the summer. We know it was disruptive, but the end result is an enhancement of the stimulating setting in which our students will carry on this phase of their quest for perfection and eternal life. Our mission statement also commits us to preparing our students in such a way and to such a degree that they are “capable of competing with the best in their fields.”5 There was ample evidence this past year that this is occurring on campus in a wide variety of ways. For example, performers from BYU’s Theatre and Media Arts Department won more than fifteen awards at the Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival—eleven of which recognized students participating in Our Town, a reinvention of the American ­classic by the students who incorporated film into the live play. A team of BYU accounting students earned first place at the national Deloitte FanTAXtic case study competition, where teams from more than 100 universities were asked to review the situation of a hypothetical company and recommend solutions based on their knowledge of tax law and practices. This is the ninth time in the past fourteen years that BYU has brought home the top prize. The women’s volleyball team played in the national championship game, upsetting higher-ranked Arizona, Florida State, and Texas along the way and becoming the first unseeded tournament team ever to reach the national championship game. And four BYU broadcast journalism ­students won Gracie Awards, national honors given by the Alliance for Women in Media to recognize the accomplishments of women in media and entertainment at the local, public, and student levels. There are numerous other examples. I don’t have time to mention them all, but I invite you to take note of and celebrate these kinds of successes in your individual colleges and departments. In our journey up the mountain, we need to pause from time to time to enjoy the view that we have gained as a result of our combined efforts. In short, we have accomplished a lot this year. And as a result of the hard work and dedication of so many—not just this past year but for many decades—we are part of an extraordinary university with a strong foundation. That fact is recognized by others who come here. You all know that representatives of the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities, our main accreditation body, visited campus this past April. I am happy to report that the visit went well and that we have recently been informed that our accreditation has been reaffirmed. I express my appreciation to so many—especially Jim Gordon and his team—who worked so hard to achieve this result. I could go on and on, but let me conclude this brief report on where we are and what we have accomplished by sharing with you the just-completed video produced by Julie Walker and her team in University Communications to introduce BYU to prospective students.6 It provides a general overview of what this university has become over the years and demonstrates that, as we look toward the future, we are built upon a very strong foundation. [The video was shown.] It is clear that we are in a good place. But we cannot stop now. As President Kimball reminded us during his address “The Second Century of Brigham Young University,” there are still hills ahead of us and mountains left to climb.7 We have a remarkable history, and we are extraordinarily situated at the present. But what about the future? What can we do this year to better assist individuals in their quest for perfection? Where do we go from here? Those who attended my inauguration and have noted the references to mountains, hills, and climbing in my remarks so far today are probably expecting at this point to hear the refrains from the closing number of The Sound of Music and a call for us to “go to the mountains.” I love that allusion and will return to it throughout my administration, but today I want to focus on particular aspects of that ascent that come from a complementary theme sounded in another address in that inauguration ceremony. While you may—or may not—have listened intently to my remarks last September, I paid most attention to the address given by President Henry B. Eyring. And I had a particular reason for doing so. When the invitation to accept my current position came to me from the First Presidency early in 2014, I did not receive much by way of instruction—or at least I do not remember receiving much. I must confess that I experienced a bit of shock when the invitation came, so when I left the Church Administration Building that morning, I could not recall any particular charge or instruction about the course of the university or the focus I should have. It was not a particularly comforting feeling. Therefore I paid particular attention to what President Eyring said during the inauguration last September, hoping to find some direction in his remarks. And, as is usually the case when we concentrate on the words of prophets, I was amply rewarded, both in the moment of delivery and during subsequent reviews of his remarks. What initially stood out to me was President Eyring’s statement that the course of this university had been set by its founder, Brigham Young, in a one-sentence declaration. Brigham Young said: Put forth your ability to learn as fast as you can, and gather all the strength of mind and principle of faith you possibly can, and then distribute your knowledge to the people.8 Embedded in that profound sentence are three important insights. First, those of us at this university have an obligation to learn as fast as we can. Second, this kind of learning requires all the strength of both our minds and our faith. And third, our responsibility does not end when we have acquired all the knowledge that results from that kind of effort; we are required to distribute that knowledge to others—or, as President Eyring phrased it later in his remarks: The vision at the founding was that all here will seek truth not for themselves alone but will also distribute what they have learned to bless others.9 Summarizing this view, President Eyring suggested that we have built and should continue to build on what he called this “shared vision of learning, teaching, and serving that has shaped this university.” Now, some may think that this emphasis on learning, teaching, and serving applies only to the core academic enterprise and that President Eyring’s charge was aimed only at the faculty. It is true that this vision requires faculty who are continually learning, both in their particular substantive areas and in the common enterprise of teaching in which all faculty are involved. It is also true that the insights faculty gain in that endeavor are to be shared both with the students they teach and with others outside the university, including not only their peers in their disciplines but also others in the world at large. However, President Eyring made clear that this one-sentence charge from Brother Brigham was “a message to all in this enterprise” (emphasis added). No one is exempt. The charge is intended to have an effect, President Eyring said, on “those who study, teach, and serve here.” That seems to cover everyone: faculty, students, and staff. It might also seem to describe the role of each of those groups. The students study, the faculty teaches, and the staff serve. However, I believe that this threefold description of learning, teaching, and serving not only makes clear that every person involved in this enterprise has a role to play but, more important, also describes the threefold responsibility that every person shares no matter what his or her particular role may be. In other words, I believe President Eyring’s charge was for all of us to engage in all aspects of the direction given by President Young. Let me reiterate Brigham Young’s instruction: Each of us—­faculty, staff, and students—are to “put forth [our] ability to learn as fast as [we] can, and gather all the strength of mind and principle of faith [we] possibly can, and then distribute [our] knowledge to the people.” To quote President Eyring, “Students, ­faculty, and staff” (note again the universality of the charge) should be “driven by a desire and a strength of mind to learn as fast as they can” and then to share their knowledge in ways that serve the needs of others. President Eyring then used a distinctive phrase to describe the kind of university this effort would produce: “This is a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters.” What a wonderful description this is of what we should be: a community of learners and lifters. I believe it is by creating a community of learners and lifters that we will best be able to play our individual roles in assisting individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Creating a community of learners and lifters is an ambitious and, I must admit, somewhat abstract goal. Just what does it mean at an operational level? I will confess that I don’t fully know the answer to that question, and I am inviting you today to begin a larger conversation about what it may mean to you both individually and as members of specific units on campus. However, let me offer a few more concrete thoughts that may help guide that conversation. First, being part of a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters means that everyone should be using their strength of mind and faith to learn as much as they can about the field and enterprise in which they are engaged. For the faculty members this means that they need to be current—indeed, cutting edge—in their understanding of the discipline in which they are working. As faculty, we cannot simply dust off the notes of our classes that we have been using for years and teach from them. We must be involved in research, especially research that we can share with our students in some way. The result of this determined effort will be the discovery of new insights about both the specific substantive disciplines of the faculty and the methods of teaching that enhance learning. But that same charge applies as well to those who work on the grounds crew or in the laundry or at the press or in dining services, technology, office work, or physical maintenance. There is something each of us can learn in our areas that will increase our knowledge and also increase our ability to perform our assigned tasks better. But President Eyring’s charge is to go beyond the mere acquisition of abstract knowledge, as essential as that is. It is a charge to consider ways in which that knowledge can have a practical application in helping others. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell said: Brigham Young University seeks to improve and “sanctify” itself for the sake of others—not for the praise of the world, but to serve the world better.10 The final requirement, then, is to look for opportunities to share that information with others so that their lives can be better. This may be easier for faculty who have a ready-made audience in the form of both students in their classrooms and peers in their discipline. But the charge extends to all involved in this enterprise. Each of us should look for ways to distribute the knowledge we have in such a way that it blesses others. For those in nonacademic units it may mean that you share the insights with coworkers or others engaged in similar activities outside the university or even with family members. For students it likely means sharing newly acquired knowledge with fellow students in class or other venues. And all of this sharing must be with the idea not of impressing others with how smart we are or how much information we know but with the desire to make others’ lives better. Imagine a community in which all members are truly engaged in an individual and collective effort to use all their minds and faith to learn as much as they can and as fast as they can, with the ultimate goal of sharing insights with others to improve their lives. Surely that would be both a vibrant and a determined community, to use President Eyring’s phrase. And it would be a community that is alive with ideas and insights gained from a sustained, substantial desire to learn, as well as one with charity generated by that same kind of effort to use that knowledge to improve the lives of others. We do not begin this effort at ground zero. As President Eyring noted, “Inspired leaders and teachers here have made it possible for students to begin to serve with what they have learned while they are still here” through mentored learning and other opportunities in which faculty invite students “to participate as partners in their own studies”—thereby lifting while they are learning. Indeed, one of the distinctive traits of this university is the extent to which students have the opportunity to work with faculty members outside of class, including on specific research projects. In the most recent National Survey of Student Engagement survey of senior ­students, 36 percent of BYU seniors indicated that they had worked with a faculty member on a research project. That is 50 percent higher than the participation rate at other universities in our same Carnegie classification and even higher than that for other universities of our size. Using data obtained from our alumni questionnaire and expanding the question to include any regular work with faculty outside the classroom, you can see the growth of faculty-student mentoring over the years, with the latest survey indicating that 49 percent of our students have had such a mentored learning experience before they graduate. Such experiences are invaluable preparation for so many things, including graduate school. Thus it is not surprising that the number of our alumni who three years after graduation have either completed or are in graduate school has also increased over the years—with the most recent data indicating that 40 percent of our alumni are in that category. While I understand the important difference between correlation and causation, I think it not entirely coincidental that those who have worked with a faculty member outside of class are more than twice as likely to attend graduate school as those who do not, as indicated by the data. Such one-on-one interaction is one prime example of the way in which faculty learners become lifters in the very process of learning. For a number of reasons—including because we are beginning to reach the limits in some departments of the number of individualized experiences students can have on campus—we are increasingly relying on well-structured and well-planned off-campus internships in which we can partner with those outside our campus to provide transforming learning experiences to our students. Such experiences provide our students with both new opportunities to learn and additional venues in which to share what they have learned. We have over the years seen a marked increase in the percentage of our students who are taking advantage of these potentially transforming opportunities, with 56 percent of those in the most recent group for whom we have data having completed an off-campus internship while at BYU. Like mentored learning opportunities, internships can provide vital preparation for the next step our students will take in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Tellingly, in that regard, 49 percent of those who completed off-campus internships received a job offer in the subject matter of their internships. Consistent with Brigham Young’s vision, the impact of such experiences is not limited to the students themselves. In many instances students are able to share what they have learned in ways that extend the impact of what happens here well beyond the borders of our campus. You may have seen the extensive media coverage generated by a group of BYU mechanical engineering students in Professor Mark Colton’s class.11 These students focused their capstone project on helping children in wheelchairs. Motorized pediatric wheelchairs can cost up to $10,000. They are often so heavy that they are not able to go up steep inclines—thereby limiting the things that their occupants can do. So this class set out to design a lightweight wheelchair that could be constructed for less than $500. The results are shown in a video. [A video was shown.] NBC News and other media outlets highlighted the project. That prompted email inquiries to BYU from throughout the world. Let me share just two examples. From Rohan Mehra, exhibition content developer, Science Museum, London: I develop . . . exhibits on contemporary science and engineering at the Science Museum in London. We’re curious about potentially displaying a version of the wheelchair and interviewing the minds behind it. Do you know if a version could be provided (at our cost) for a period? Frank Niendorff: Very impressive project. After reading about the wheelchair, I am interested in finding out [whether] the plans, specs, and material lists are available. I live in Austin, TX, am retired, have a full workshop, and would very much like to make some of these wheelchairs and give them to the children’s hospital or other charitable organizations that support disabled children. The last line of our mission statement expresses the firm belief that “the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission . . . will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University’s influence in a world we wish to improve.”12 The wheelchair project is exhibit A, offered as proof that establishing a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters will better enable us to fulfill that charge. With such persuasive evidence of the far-reaching and long-lasting positive impact of mentored learning and internships, it should be no surprise that we intend to make mentored learning and internship experiences a priority this year and in the years to come. We are looking for ways to increase both the number and quality of those opportunities for our students. We will use the endpoints of the rather impressive data of student involvement I cited today as the baseline for one measure of how successful we are in fulfilling our charge to become a community of learners and lifters. As we do that, we anticipate that there will be even more interaction between our faculty and staff on the one hand and our students on the other. As this happens, I implore you not to focus solely on the secular knowledge you will be sharing with our students. For us to fulfill our charge to be learners and lifters in the eternal and most important sense, we must also engage in spiritual mentoring. As you interact with these wonderful young people, keep in mind President Kimball’s observation: You can . . . be more effective in the service you render students if students see you as individuals who have blended successfully things secular and things spiritual in a way that has brought to you earned respect in both realms.13 In that regard, President J. Reuben Clark Jr.’s admonition to never let your faith be difficult to detect is fully applicable to this enterprise.14 I implore you not to hide what is most important to you and what will be most important to those whom you mentor. You can best help lift them at critical points in their quest for perfection and eternal life only if they clearly understand the true source of all knowledge and wisdom and service and power. We must ever point them to Him. As we jointly and universally engage in the process of learning and lifting, we will create a community that is not only distinctive but in some ways unique. We have seen examples of that on this campus as well. As those who have been at BYU for some time will have discovered, employment slots, or FTEs, as we call them, are among the most valuable resources on campus. People can be hired to help in any part of campus only if there is an authorized FTE for that position, and those positions are limited. FTEs are sometimes more difficult to find than the funds to pay the salary. In most organizations, such precious resources would be carefully collected and guarded—and probably hoarded—within units. And yet, several years ago, the nonacademic support units on campus concluded that they could best help advance the mission of the university by consolidating their efforts and freeing up FTEs to be transferred to hire more faculty members. The six Teaching and Learning Faculty Fellowships announced this morning represent just a portion of the sacrifice made by the university’s support services to make that happen. This is a remarkable example of consecration that is not likely to be found in many, if any, other places. A similar example occurred this past year. As many of you know, we have for the past few years been raising funds for a new addition to the engineering building. Despite strenuous efforts and generous donations by many, the project seemed somewhat stalled last fall. During that fundraising period, Dean Rod Brown of the College of Life Sciences noted that his college’s need for a new facility had been generously and fully funded by the Church. Having been blessed in that way, he wondered if there was anything the College of Life Sciences could do to help with the engineering project. After some discussion, the College of Life Sciences agreed to make a significant donation to the engineering project, using funds that could appropriately be repurposed in that way. Shortly thereafter, the Division of Continuing Education made a similar donation, and then Print and Mail Services followed suit. When these remarkable donations were announced at a meeting of our major donors this past spring, one donor—who has been involved with a number of ­universities—commented, “This kind of thing would not happen at any other university.” I believe he is right. This is a unique academic community in which people by nature lift and help one another in unexpected, and almost miraculous, ways. Let me give one concluding example—one that is perhaps less dramatic but likely more representative of the often unnoticed ways in which learning and lifting occurs on this campus. As many of you know, law school can be very competitive. At most law schools, including BYU’s, students are literally ranked in order by their grades, and employers often make the initial hiring decisions based primarily on that ranking. It is an environment rife with competition—looking at the other person, trying to better them. To add to the tension, in most law-school classes the seemingly all-important grade is determined solely on the basis of the final examination. As you might imagine, the stress levels at the law school are quite high during finals. On one occasion I led a student discussion on pride and competition. In that setting, a first-year student, who had recently been through the soul-trying experience of the first set of law-school finals, related the following experience, which I share with his permission: When I came to BYU Law School, I immediately developed a big, fat crush on my entire 1L class: they were the nicest, smartest, most interesting ­people that I had ever been around. . . . [Even though] I realized right away that I was outgunned, outsmarted, and outpaced in every class . . . , I didn’t resent the successes of my peers; they were . . . my friends, and I liked them. . . . As classes ended, [however,] and our 1L class threw all its weight, collectively and individually . . . , toward finals, I was anxious. The anxiety grew and turned black. I studied hard and long, but I felt more insecure the more I studied. The student went on to say that he began to stay away from his classmates because each interaction with them increasingly convinced him that they knew more than he did and that he was, therefore, destined to fail. He then related: I was praying early one morning about finals, asking for help to do my best [or even to just pass the class], and I began describing the bleak feelings I harbored, and I asked for help. After a few minutes, I [suddenly] found myself [praying] not [just] for myself but for my classmates, and not just for those few that I knew . . . struggled [with the material,] as I did, but for the gifted and the talented as well. I prayed that they would do their best, that they would have peace and clarity. As I prayed for them . . . , I felt a surge of love for the classmates I had admired and had liked so much in the beginning. He then began to reengage with his fellow students, not just to learn from them but with the thought that he might actually have something he could offer to them. At that point his stress level dropped dramatically, his learning increased considerably, and his view of law school and life was transformed. He was a learner and a lifter whose lifting amplified his learning. Who knew that finals, especially law-school finals, could be a spiritual experience? They can—and should be—at BYU. And so we look forward to the coming year with optimism, knowing that as we become a vibrant and dedicated community of learners and lifters, we will truly assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life. There will be challenges. Some of what we do will not win the praise of the world; indeed, some of the things we do may be ridiculed. Events around us will cause some to question our values and our course of action. We are ready to address such challenges in ways that I may explain more fully at a future time. In the meantime, we can all take comfort, as did I, in the words of President Eyring at last September’s inauguration: In the midst of what may at times seem a tumult, [President Worthen] will be carried back to the view that is the heart of this university by the joy he has always found in being a determined learner and a mentor of other children of God. . . . . . . He will then find himself saying quietly in the face of what appear to be crises, “Things will work out.” I bear my witness that, as President Eyring testified, God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ live and that “They have been and always will be attentive to the needs of all who study and serve others here and who go on learning and serving others over their lifetimes and beyond.” As we follow that clearly marked path, we will be blessed and prospered. I so testify in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> Service is not just connected to joy in some amorphous, general way. Service is an essential part of the refining process that makes true joy possible. There are many iconic symbols here on campus that help graduates remember—hopefully with fondness—their time at BYU. For many it is the Y on the mountain. For some it is the cougar statue at the LaVell Edwards Stadium. For others it is a particular building. Who knows, with enough time and perspective, even the Testing Center may bring warm memories. Maybe not. For many, the symbol they will remember the most is the sign at the southwest entrance to campus: Enter to Learn; Go Forth to Serve. This seven-word injunction has been the topic of numerous campus devotionals,1 professorial admonitions, and, most especially, commencement and convocation addresses.2 Anyone who has attended many graduation ceremonies at BYU has surely heard at least one talk on the topic. So with full understanding that I am not being original, I would like to focus on this saying one more time in a graduation setting because I believe that, notwithstanding the constant repetition, we may still underestimate the depth of its importance and meaning. A Connection Between Joy and Service First, a bit of history and context. The Enter to Learn; Go Forth to Serve sign was erected on campus in 1965 as part of an effort to spruce up the west entrance to campus. Judging by press coverage at the time, the most exciting feature of the redesign was not the sign or the sign on the other side of the street but the addition of an information center just to the east of the sign on the south side of the road. Touting this new addition, the Daily Universe proclaimed with seeming excitement that the small building contained heating for year-round use, a sliding window, and—wonder of wonders—a telephone that student employees would use to call ahead to those expecting the visitors.3 Times have changed a bit. The Information Center has been demolished, telephone and all. The sign has endured. When plans for the new entrance were being considered, “the university invited faculty members, and others, to submit a slogan or motto which would be suitable to be placed at the main entrance.”4 The suggestion to use Enter to Learn; Go Forth to Serve was submitted by Stewart L. Grow, a professor of history and political science at the university. In his autobiography, Professor Grow explained why he had submitted that slogan: Enter to Learn; Go Forth to Serve is . . . a distillation of my life’s philosophy. We are born to gain experience in learning and have both the obligation and the reward of serving. . . . I know of no better way to expand the joy which man should have than to create a world in which all men will be motivated to learn and to serve each other.5 Thus, from the very outset of its existence at BYU, the injunction to “enter to learn; go forth to serve” has reflected a profound truth: there is a connection between joy and service. Others have recognized this truth and have used the exact same slogan to remind them of its veracity. Even though he was the first to suggest the motto at BYU, Professor Grow was not its original author. Nor was BYU the first educational enterprise to feature the phrase. According to an article in the Deseret News a few years ago, “schools from California to Connecticut to Canada have taken” the slogan as their motto—some before BYU did. “The New York City police academy adopted the slogan in 1925. It was on the cover of the yearbook at Fairfax High School in Los Angeles in 1926.” And it was located “above the door of Fair Haven Middle School in Connecticut in 1929.” At least four other colleges have adopted it as their motto as well.6 Clearly the message has, over time, resonated broadly with those involved in education. An Essential Part of the Refining Process But even though BYU was not the first educational institution to use the slogan, I believe it has particular significance here because of our understanding of the truths of the gospel—which shapes the kind of education we hope you received here, an education that President Spencer W. Kimball called an “education for eternity.”7 As sound as the instruction to “enter to learn; go forth to serve” is in temporal affairs, it is of even more importance when viewed in the eternal setting of the plan of salvation. As Elder L. Tom Perry once noted: This challenge [to enter to learn and go forth to serve] not only applies to BYU students. . . . It would also be appropriate and correct to say this challenge represents the purpose of our mortal experience.8 Service is not just connected to joy in some amorphous, general way. Service is an essential part of the refining process that makes true joy possible. I first gained some insight into this truth when I was serving as a bishop. It was a busy time of my life with a young family and a busy career. I loved serving as bishop, but I must admit that there were times when I felt a bit overwhelmed and overtaxed, weary of dealing with other people’s problems—even occasionally just tired of serving. One year as general conference approached, one of my fellow bishops who shared my feelings noted that he referred to general conference as a “bishop’s holiday”—a Sunday in which he did not have to deal with the problems of others or serve their needs. When he told me this, the thought came to me that it might be a good idea to expand the number of bishop’s holidays in a year. In fact, I thought maybe the ideal Sunday would be one in which I didn’t have to deal with anyone else’s issues or problems—a Sunday in which I would spend time renewing my covenants, reading scriptures, praying, and enjoying the company of loved ones without any obligation to serve others. It was in that general frame of mind that I came across a statement from President Marion G. Romney that changed my thinking dramatically: Service is not something we endure on this earth so we can earn the right to live in the celestial kingdom. Service is the very fiber of which an exalted life in the celestial kingdom is made. Knowing that service is what gives our Father in Heaven fulfillment, and knowing that we want to be where He is and as He is, why must we be commanded to serve one another? Oh, for the glorious day when these things all come naturally because of the purity of our hearts. In that day there will be no need for a commandment because we will have experienced for ourselves that we are truly happy only when we are engaged in unselfish service.9 As I read this inspired declaration, I was struck with an almost frightening thought. If I didn’t enjoy serving, I wouldn’t enjoy the celestial kingdom. Service is what they do there. As I reflected on that thought, I suddenly had a new insight into people like President Thomas S. Monson, who, when he had free time—when he could choose for himself what to do in a spare moment—sought to serve others. He didn’t serve out of a sense of duty or to provide us with a good example. He served because that is what he really wanted to do—all the time. That is what brought him joy. That is what brings Heavenly Father joy. Joy Out of Serving Over time I have come to believe that one measure of our eternal progress is how much joy we derive from service. In that regard, I have told my family that when I get as much joy out of serving as I do from watching BYU win an athletic contest over one particular opponent, I will know that I am finally firmly on the path to heaven. At BYU we strive to provide an education that is spiritually strengthening, intellectually enlarging, and character building, all leading to two things: lifelong learning and service.10 I think we sometimes fail to recognize that lifelong modifies both learning and service. We often quote Brigham Young to make clear that learning is eternal: We might ask, when shall we cease to learn? I will give you my opinion about it; never, never. . . . We shall never cease to learn, unless we apostatize from the religion of Jesus Christ.11 I believe this observation applies with full force to service as well. To paraphrase Brother Brigham, “We might ask ourselves, when shall we cease to serve? Never, never. We shall never cease to serve unless we apostatize from the religion of Jesus Christ.” If we stop serving, our eternal progress will stop because “service is the very fiber of which an exalted life in the celestial kingdom is made.” Many in the world are searching for the kind of competence, compassion, and vision you have developed as a result of the gifts God has given you, including your education here. I extend my warmest congratulations and best wishes to each of the graduates today. Graduation is properly a time of celebration—a time to rejoice in the success you have all achieved in earning your degree. It is also properly a time to look forward to what lies ahead—that is in part why we call this ­ceremony a commencement. Many of you will go immediately into your first post-college full-time job. Others will head to graduate school. Some will dedicate themselves to the full-time pursuit of raising children. Each of these new adventures will likely be challenging, stimulating, and, in a few cases, close to all consuming—in ways that may cause you to lose perspective. As you begin this next phase of your life, especially the majority of you who will eventually spend most of your waking hours in a career outside the home, I ask you to reflect on the words of Os Guinness, who astutely observed that, in today’s society, work takes up so many of our waking hours that our jobs come to define us and give us our ­identities. We become what we do.1 The world would often teach us that we are what we do. It does not take long in most social gatherings to realize this. One of the first questions that is asked when meeting a new person in a professional setting is “What do you do?” The answer to that question not only determines the subject and length of the ensuing conversation but also often creates the identity of the respondent from that point on. Guinness urges us to not fall into the trap of defining ourselves by our jobs but instead to view our jobs—indeed, our entire lives—as a calling and to choose our jobs and how we fulfill them by determining who we are. In his words: Calling reverses [the world’s] thinking. . . . Instead of, “You are what you do,” calling says: “Do what you are.”2 I urge you to consider this concept as you move ahead with your lives, because who you are is extraordinary—“beloved . . . son[s] or daughter[s] of heavenly parents” with “a divine nature and destiny.”3 And as a result of who you are—and who you can become—you can have a profound impact on those around you, not only in your jobs but also in your communities and, most important, in your homes. Because you have lived in the unique environment that is Brigham Young University for the past few years, you may overlook the depth of the impact that those who become what the university and the gospel urge them to become can have on others on this campus. In 2005, Naomi Schaeffer Riley wrote a book about religiously affiliated universities in the United States. The book is entitled God on the Quad. Riley began her book describing a speech given by author Tom Wolfe at a Class Day address at Harvard in which Wolfe described our current time frame as “the era of the ‘fifth freedom’—freedom from religion.”4 In a subsequent interview, Wolfe observed that in our society there has been a removal of what he called this “last hobble” on our freedom.5 Having grown up in an environment that largely shared this very secularized view, Riley was intrigued by the increase in popularity of religiously affiliated universities, and she set out, in a somewhat skeptical manner, to visit some of those universities in order to explore what she called “the missionary generation” at America’s religiously affiliated universities. Her first visit was to BYU. She arrived on campus on September 10, 2001, the day before the date we now refer to as simply 9/11. She described what happened as the events of 9/11 unfolded: I began the first formal interviews for this book on September 10, 2001. The next day, two thousand miles from home, I sat on the edge of my hotel bed, looking out over the strip malls to the treeless mountains beyond, wondering more than anything else about how to get home. Home for me is Blue America. I have lived in four states, all in the northeast. I attended two secular colleges and grew up with a sense that religion, while socially beneficial . . . , was not true. In other words, I had already expected to feel distinctly out of place on these campuses. And the events of that Tuesday morning only intensified the feeling. Over the next week, the students at Brigham Young [University] tried to welcome me into their lives. While national tragedies tend to bring out the best in many people, the first representatives of the “missionary generation” I encountered could not have made a greater impression upon me. Their kindness and compassion, their civic-mindedness, their understanding and interest in national and international affairs, the quiet comfort they were able to find in their faith, and their ability to relate to this stranger in their midst gave me cause for optimism.6 These BYU students had a profound impact on Riley because they understood who they really were, and they were able to communicate that to her in a way that we may not always discern since we are already here. You can have a similar impact on those around you if you understand and realize who you really are. After describing her initial experience at BYU, Riley continued her introduction to the book by writing: At the end of his Class Day address, Tom Wolfe worried that the “religious self-discipline that ran through the American people from one side to the other” and held this country together through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries has now disappeared. Wolfe predicted that the twenty-first century would be a period of “revaluation,” in which we will have to “create an entirely new ethical and moral framework.” Searching for a person who “[could] lead mankind into [such] a new era,” Wolfe asked his audience, “Where else should we find such a person but at Harvard?”7 Riley then asked, tellingly, in the last words of her introduction, “Where else, indeed?”8 Her unwritten—but clear—answer is perhaps at places like BYU. As you begin this next phase of your lives, do not underestimate your potential for good in the world. Many in the world are searching for the kind of competence, compassion, and vision you have developed as a result of the gifts God has given you, including your education here. If you will remember who you are—sons and daughters of heavenly parents with a divine purpose for your lives—you will find that who you are will define everything you do and that the things you do will make a profound difference in the world. May it be so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> While all human beings share a common bond as beloved spirit children of Heavenly Parents, each of us is a unique individual with individual personalities, experiences, and gifts. And each of these individual characteristics can contribute to greater unity. Welcome to the start of a new semester, one full of promise but also one in which we face two major challenges: (1) a global pandemic that threatens our physical health and (2) increasing divisiveness and anger that threaten the moral and spiritual fiber of our society. Basically, COVID and chaos. The good news is that there are things within our individual and collective control that we can do to address both of these challenges. The Seventh-Inning Stretch Let me start with the first. Even though many of the traditional educational routines continue to be altered because of the coronavirus, there is increasing light on the horizon. With the rapidly expanding availability of a vaccine, we can envision a future in which we will be able to gather more often and in larger numbers and in which in-person meetings and classes will become the norm rather than the exception. But—and this is important—that day has not come yet, and the speed with which it comes, as well as the adverse impact the virus will have in the interim, will depend in no small part on the degree to which we continue to adhere to safety and health guidelines over these next few months. So while there is increased optimism because the end is in sight, there is a commensurate need to be more diligent than ever in wearing masks, washing our hands, maintaining social distancing, and complying with testing protocols. As I have considered our situation in this regard, my mind has gone to a tradition that began in earnest with William Howard Taft, the twenty-seventh president of the United States and later chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court—the only person in U.S. history to serve as the head of both the executive and judicial branches. President Taft was a large man, standing more than six feet in height and weighing well more than 300 pounds. He was also an avid fan of major-league baseball. On April 14, 1910, President Taft attended the opening game of the major-league season between the Washington Senators and the Philadelphia Athletics. According to one report: As the face-off between the Senators and the Athletics wore on, the rotund, six-foot-two president . . . grew more and more uncomfortable in his small wooden chair. By the middle of the seventh inning he could bear it no lon­ger and stood up to stretch his aching legs—­whereupon everyone else in the stadium, thinking the president was about to leave, rose to show their respect. A few minutes later Taft returned to his seat, the crowd followed suit, and the “seventh-inning stretch” was born.1 While most historians agree that something akin to a late-inning stretch took place sporadically at some baseball games prior to 1910,2 its enduring popularity as one of baseball’s most deeply embedded rituals can be traced in large part to Taft’s aches and pains at that Senators-Athletics game. Now what does President Taft’s experience at a baseball game more than a century ago have to do with us? Let me suggest that with respect to the pandemic, we are just finishing the seventh-inning stretch. Just as President Taft needed a break after sitting in an undersized seat for six and a half innings, many of us were ready for a change by the end of last fall semester. If seven innings of being confined to an uncomfortable seat can seem like a long time, nine months of social distancing, Zoom classes, and mask wearing can seem like a lifetime. Yet we persevered. We made it to the end of the fall semester, and we welcomed the chance to change positions—to stretch, so to speak. The pandemic seventh-inning stretch came just in time for many of us. But the game was not over when President Taft took that rejuvenating break. He was reenergized, but he returned to his wooden chair, and its shape and size were no more accommodating than they were before he stood. There was more baseball to be played, and the outcome was still uncertain.3 A lot can happen in the last two innings of a baseball game. Similarly, the pandemic experience is not over for us. The need to adhere to the guidelines is more important than ever. Because of your good work last semester, we are ahead. And if we stay ahead—if we finish strong—we can, like the home baseball team, end the game one-half inning early. If, on the other hand, we lose focus and let down our guard, the virus may overtake us, requiring us to go extra innings—or worse, to cancel the game. The seventh-inning stretch can, therefore, not only rejuvenate us but also remind us of the need to continue on—the need to persevere. The word persevere has a deeper meaning than we may realize. President Russell M. Nelson recently shared with us that one of the Hebrew meanings of the theologically significant name Israel is “let God prevail.”4 Another Hebrew meaning of that name—given to Jacob after his bout of wrestling—is “persevere”: “he perseveres (with) God.”5 This linguistic connection between persevere and Israel reminds us that difficult tasks, like persevering through a pandemic, are easier when we involve God in the process. So I urge you to persevere—to “be not weary in well-doing,”6 as modern ­scripture puts it. We have made it to the seventh-inning stretch. We just need to finish strong. One key to persevering comes from another aspect of the traditional seventh-inning stretch. Years after President Taft’s precedent-setting stretch in 1910, some teams began to add music to the tradition. In 1934, the song “Take Me Out to the Ball Game” was played for the first time in a World Series game.7 Over the ensuing decades, that song has become standard seventh-inning fare at most major-league parks.8 Because of its association with the seventh-inning stretch, it is now unquestionably the best-known baseball song in America—one that unifies the entire crowd at a baseball game, regardless of their team preference. To those unfamiliar with baseball, this surely must be odd. As one reporter put it: The seventh-inning stretch is a bit bizarre—fans suddenly standing up and singing a song about attending the very event they’re at—but it’s . . . a ritual that makes baseball baseball, with its history and shared experiences.9 And it is that unifying element of the ritual that makes the moment so powerful and reenergizing. It doesn’t matter how well you sing or which team you are cheering for: during the seventh-inning stretch, you are united with others around you—brought together in the moment. As one Colorado Rockies fan explained: At the ballpark it doesn’t matter if you sing alto or awful. . . . “. . . [Baseball is] best enjoyed if you embrace . . . the chance to stand up and join in a tradition where, for one minute, we can all get along—even with the Cards fans or Dodgers fans.”10 There is, as Joseph Smith explained, power in unity.11 And we are in more need of that unifying power than perhaps at any time in our lifetimes, not only to weather the pandemic storm but also to address pressing issues like social justice, ­poverty, racism, and angry divisiveness and ­intolerance in political and other matters. That We May Be as One Unity is a concept that extends well beyond baseball, and even beyond any of the more important issues we currently face. It is an eternal gospel principle whose presence or absence determines not only the stability and prosperity of a community but also our own eternal destiny.12 Simply put, we cannot be exalted without achieving a high level of unity. The Lord made this clear in section 38 of the Doctrine and Covenants. He commanded the early Saints, “Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine.”13 Given the centrality of unity to our eternal destiny, it is not surprising that on the last evening of His mortal ministry, the Savior prayed to His Heavenly Father on behalf of His beloved disciples, asking “that they may be one, even as we are one . . . , that they may be made perfect in one.”14 The positive impact of unity on individuals and society is demonstrated by scriptural examples of societies that had achieved an extraordinary level of unity. These include the descendants of Lehi in the American continent after the visitation of the Savior,15 the members of the early Church in the Middle East shortly after the Savior’s mortal ministry there,16 and the ancient people of Enoch.17 In each of these situations, the members of the society had “their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another”18 to such an extent that they could be described as being “of one heart.”19 Speaking of those who had reached this level of unity, Mormon observed, “Surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.”20 Unity is essential to our happiness. Some may find a call for unity strange at a time when we are working to promote more diversity on campus. But, as Elder Quentin L. Cook noted in the most recent general conference, “unity and diversity are not opposites. We can achieve greater unity as we foster an atmosphere of inclusion and respect for diversity.”21 Some confusion on this issue comes from the ambiguity of the term unity. True unity does not require us to give up our individuality. As the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. observed, “Unity has never meant uniformity.”22 While all human beings share a common bond as beloved spirit children of Heavenly Parents,23 each of us is a unique individual with individual personalities, experiences, and gifts. And each of these individual characteristics can contribute to greater unity. The apostle Paul explained how this works in his first epistle to the Saints at Corinth. After noting the different gifts that different individuals had been blessed with, Paul taught that even though the gifts were different, each contributed to the whole, just as individual parts of the body contribute to the wellness of the whole body. And each individual part is equally important. Paul said: For the body is not one member, but many. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? . . . If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? . . . But now are they many members, yet but one body. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.24 President Howard W. Hunter summarized the point and applied it to the modern-day Church when he stated: We are truly dependent on each other, “and the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.” (1 Cor. 12:21.) Nor can the North Americans say to the Asians, nor the Europeans to the islanders of the sea, “I have no need of thee.” No, in this church we have need of every member, and we pray, as did Paul when he wrote to the church in Corinth, “that there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another. “And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the ­members rejoice with it.” (1 Cor. 12:25–26.)25 That same principle applies with full force to the university community. When we welcome and value the gifts, talents, experiences, and perspectives of all of God’s children who are engaged in our common enterprise, we will not only more fully reach our individual potential but will also be more united. Elder Bruce C. Hafen offered a simple analogy to explain how bringing together those with diverse gifts, personalities, and experiences can produce an enhanced and enriched form of unity: For me, the ideal metaphor is a musical one: with our many voices, we could all sing in unison, in harmony, or in dissonance. Of these three, I prefer harmony, because it enables a variety of voices to blend into a fuller, richer sound than mere unison.26 And, as demonstrated by Marcus Roberts and the Modern Jazz Generation at a forum here last February, the analogy applies regardless of the type of music. Even in a jazz ensemble in which individual improvisation often takes center stage, there is still a need for unity, and the results of this combination of individuality and unity are sweet, as demonstrated in the following clip. [A video clip was shown.27] So if we want to achieve our full potential as individuals and as a campus community, we need to emphasize both unity and diversity—both our commonality and our individuality. Without unity, diversity becomes divisive. Without diversity, unity becomes stagnant. As Pastor Skip Heitzig put it, “If you have unity without variety, you have uniformity and that’s boring. If you have variety without unity, you have anarchy.”28 A powerful example of what can happen when unity and diversity combine was provided by our football team this past fall. As the team gathered for summer workouts, the sporting world—and most of society—was focused on racial inequalities and inequities that were brought to the fore by a number of events. Co-captain Troy Warner explained, “We just wanted to get together . . . and just kind of talk about how we were feeling, let players express their feelings, their emotions.”29 As described by one reporter: Black players, Polynesian players and white players took turns. They had seen NBA players wearing social justice messages on their uniforms. . . . The BYU players decided they wanted to send a message, too, one they hoped would be visible to the millions expected to watch broadcasts of their games. . . . “We had an open forum about what we thought should be the message,” junior wide receiver Dax Milne said. “We really tried hard to make it a message that was not controversial . . . , and someone mentioned ‘love one another,’” a teaching of Jesus Christ that resonates deeply with members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.30 The team designed a T-shirt with “We Are One” on the front and “Love One Another” on the back, reflecting both the power of unity and the means by which that happens. As co-captain Isaiah Kaufusi stated, “We’ve chosen to love, and that unites us.”31 The message was seen by millions, and sales of the T-shirts generated more than $200,000 in ­profits—all of which the players decided to contribute to scholarships for first-generation college students and others with extenuating circumstances at BYU.32 If we strive for true unity by following the Savior’s example to love others, regardless of their race, gender, sexual orientation, political leanings, or other distinguishing characteristics, we can truly transform both our university community and the larger world with which we interact. Two Things We Can Do to Persevere and Be More Unified Let me suggest two things we can do to enhance unity and diversity in ways that will help us both persevere though the pandemic and lay the foundation for a stronger, more diverse, and more unified campus. 1. We Must Avoid Contention First, we must avoid contention. While diversity is not the opposite of unity, contention is. As the Savior Himself made clear when He was laying the foundation for a Zion society in the ancient Americas: He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. Behold, this is not my doctrine . . . ; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away.33 This does not mean that we will not disagree with each other, but it does mean we will do so in a way that both focuses on issues and not on ad hominem attacks and reflects the truth that each of us, including those with whom we disagree, is a beloved spirit child of Heavenly Parents. Former academic vice president James R. Rasband explained at our annual university conference in 2017: For us it is not unity or diversity but both unity and diversity. . . . Diverse perspectives and experiences will be a boon to our effort to discern how best to accomplish our Mission and Aims. We won’t always agree, but we can disagree charitably. By charitable disagreement I mean more than basic civility. Instead of mere civility, which is a baseline obligation, I hope we will listen—really listen—to each other and work to understand one another’s views and statements in a charitable light. What an oasis of learning we would be if pursuing light and truth were the goal and if inevitable disagreements were handled with true charity.34 Oh, how we need that kind of oasis in the world today. And BYU can be that oasis. As Dr. King put it, “Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that.”35 As the football T-shirts remind us, if we want to be one, we must love one another, even those—especially those—with whom we disagree. 2. Perfect Unity Is Achieved Only Through God and Christ Second, we need to recognize that perfect unity can be achieved only through God and Christ. Our efforts to become united will be fully successful only if we focus first on our relationship with Them. The Guide to the Scriptures defines unity as “to become one in thought, desire, and purpose first with our Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ, and then with other Saints.”36 If we align ourselves more with God and Christ, we will become more loving, we will see others more for who they really are, and we will draw closer to both God and our fellow human beings. Elder David A. Bednar once explained this truth in a more visual way with respect to married couples. Using a triangle with Christ at the apex and a wife at the base of one corner and a husband at the base of the other, both separated from each other and from the Savior, Elder Bednar explained that as both of those in the couple focus their attention on the Savior, they are drawn upward to Him, and they naturally move closer toward one another at the same time. As Elder Bednar explained, “Because of and through the Redeemer, . . . [people] come closer together.”37 When speaking of the Zion societies described in 4 Nephi and the New Testament book of Acts, Sister Reyna I. Aburto explained: We can suppose that the reason why they were so united is because they knew the Lord personally. They had been close to Him, and they had been witnesses of His divine mission, of the miracles that He performed, and of His Resurrection. . . . They knew that “He is the source of all healing, peace, and eternal progress.”38 God is the author of diversity and the source of unity. As we come closer to Him and to His Son, Jesus Christ, we will advance both powerful principles in a synergistic way. As we embrace our true primary identity as children of God and act as disciples of Christ, they will magnify our individual gifts while also making us more united. So my message to you is simple: persevere in unity by coming closer to Heavenly Father and Christ, who never tire and who are perfectly united.39 If we do so, we will be able to successfully meet whatever challenges we may face individually or collectively in the coming semester and year. May we do so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> But there is even more good news for those who question their ability to receive and recognize revelation despite their sincere but often seemingly ineffective efforts to do so. It is that you are likely doing better at receiving revelation than you think. This is an exciting time to be at BYU. It is the beginning of a new semester, the women’s volleyball team is ranked number one, and no one of you is more than a week behind in your classes. If we keep those two things in the same order, we will be doing well this semester. It is also a time when there is much of significance happening in the world and in the Church. The inspired changes in priesthood quorums and the new emphasis on ministering announced at the April general conference provide ample evidence that revelation is thriving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and that the Lord is hastening His work.1 President Russell M. Nelson seemed to forecast that even greater things are in store for us when, at the Sunday morning session of conference, he declared: Our Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, will perform some of His mightiest works between now and when He comes again. We will see miraculous indications that God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, preside over this Church in majesty and glory.2 The fact that you are here on earth at this stage of its history is a compliment to you and your potential. As President Nelson recently observed: There is something undeniably special about this generation of youth. Your Heavenly Father must have great confidence in you to send you to earth at this time. You were born for greatness! The days ahead will be breathtaking. Father in Heaven must have known that you would be just the people He needs to do remarkable things in the latter days—the days leading up to the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.3 A Challenge and an Invitation But with that exciting celestial vote of confidence comes a prophetic challenge. Following his declaration that Christ will perform some of His mightiest works in our day, President Nelson added in general conference an equally thrilling warning and then later an invitation: In coming days, it will not be possible to survive spiritually without the guiding, directing, comforting, and constant influence of the Holy Ghost.4 In that same Sunday morning talk, President Nelson underscored the need for us to receive revelation: If we are to have any hope of sifting through the myriad of voices and the philosophies of men that attack truth, we must learn to receive revelation.5 At the end of his remarks, he added this urgent invitation: My beloved brothers and sisters, I plead with you to increase your spiritual capacity to receive revelation. . . . Choose to do the spiritual work required to enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost and hear the voice of the Spirit more frequently and more clearly.6 Learning That Leads to Inspiration, or Revelation This prophetic charge to increase our ability to learn by revelation is consistent with our recent university emphasis on inspiring learning. Over the last two years, we have used the term inspiring learning to summarize what we hope happens to you at BYU. Inspiring is a noun, or really a gerund, describing the act of motivating someone to do something and is also an adjective describing a type of learning—learning that leads to inspiration, or revelation. Thus, when we talk about inspiring learning, we are describing our hope that you will be inspired, motivated, to learn and that that learning will lead to inspiration, or revelation. Our goal of inspiring learning, together with President Nelson’s prophetic admonition, makes it clear that your success at BYU in this year and in the coming years and, more important, your eternal destiny will depend in large part on your ability to receive, recognize, and respond to revelation. Now I must confess that when I was about your age, admonitions about the need to receive revelation intimidated and, quite frankly, worried me more than a little bit. While some of my acquaintances would share stories about how the Spirit had given them specific directions in dramatic ways, I could not readily recall any such personal experiences. I started wondering whether I was missing something. I began to imagine that I would get up to the judgment bar, and God would say to me, “I tried to tell you what you needed to do in life on such and such a date and again on another such date, and you just missed it.” That feeling was compounded a bit during my mission when I had one particular companion who genuinely had a gift for knowing where to go to find people who were ready to accept the gospel. While we would be tracting, I would usually simply begin on the first street and go from one house to the next in a perfectly orderly fashion. He, on the other hand, would feel impressed to skip houses or entire streets because he felt impressed that someone way down the line had been prepared to listen to us. And more often than not, he was right. I rarely, if ever, felt such promptings. Thus, for much of my youth and young adulthood, I wondered if I had been born spiritually tone deaf. If you have ever found yourself feeling that way, and especially if you feel that way now, I want to speak to you particularly today because, as President Nelson made clear, much of what we are to accomplish individually, as a university, and as a Church depends on our ability to refine our spiritual hearing. Let me first assure you that none of us is spiritually tone deaf. Because all of us are literal spirit children of perfect Heavenly Parents, each of us has the innate potential to receive and recognize revelation. As Joseph Smith once observed: It is the privilege of the children of God to come to God and get revelation. . . . God is not a respecter of persons; we all have the same privilege.7 Moreover, God does not arbitrarily give us a limited number of specific chances to receive revelation and then judge us eternally on how we did in those particular moments. There is, thankfully, no one-time, single-question, high-stakes final exam on receiving revelation. God is infinitely more patient, infinitely more loving, and infinitely more anxious for us to succeed than we can comprehend. He will give us opportunity after opportunity after opportunity to be guided by Him. His deepest desire is to help us develop our innate capacity to receive revelation. President Nelson shared that good news with us in his April conference message, quoting in part from Doctrine and Covenants 121:33: Does God really want to speak to you? Yes! “As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course . . . as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.”8 But there is even more good news for those who question their ability to receive and recognize revelation despite their sincere but often seemingly ineffective efforts to do so. It is that you are likely doing better at receiving revelation than you think. The scriptures make clear that it is possible to be influenced by the Holy Ghost and not fully recognize it. Speaking of the Lamanites who had embraced the gospel prior to the resurrected Christ’s visit to ancient America, the Lord said, “Because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion, [they] were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not.”9 These Saints received the Holy Ghost, which the Prophet Joseph said is always accompanied by revelation,10 but they did not realize it. They had received and been influenced by revelation, but they knew it not. A similar thing happened to Oliver Cowdery, who received a witness before he met Joseph Smith that Joseph’s message was true. However, he later questioned whether that was the case and sought another revelation. As Elder David A. Bednar once explained, the Lord’s reassuring response—found in section 6 of the Doctrine and Covenants11—was a revelation . . . informing [Oliver] that he had been receiving revelation. Apparently Oliver had not recognized how and when he had been receiving direction from God and needed this instruction to increase his understanding about the spirit of revelation.12 Thus we can receive and be influenced by revelation without fully recognizing it. I believe that happens more often than we think and that, therefore, we are better at the process than we might initially suppose. Elder Bednar has provided one explanation of why this can happen. He likened the experience of receiving revelation to two different ways that we have experienced the physical transition from dark to light: The first experience occurred as we entered a dark room and turned on a light switch. . . . In an instant a bright flood of illumination filled the room and caused the darkness to disappear. . . . The second experience took place as we watched night turn into morning. . . . In contrast to turning on a light in a dark room, the light from the rising sun did not immediately burst forth. Rather, gradually and steadily the intensity of the light increased, and the darkness of night was replaced by the radiance of morning. Eventually, the sun did dawn over the skyline.13 Elder Bednar then explained how these two experiences relate to the receipt of revelation: A light turned on in a dark room is like receiving a message from God quickly, completely, and all at once. . . . Descriptions of such immediate and intense manifestations are found in the scriptures, recounted in Church history, and evidenced in our own lives. . . . However, this pattern of revelation tends to be more rare than common.14 By contrast, Elder Bednar explained: The gradual increase of light radiating from the rising sun is like receiving a message from God “line upon line, precept upon precept” (2 Nephi 28:30). . . . Such communications from Heavenly Father gradually and gently “distil upon [our souls] as the dews from heaven” (D&C 121:45). This pattern of revelation tends to be more common than rare.15 My experience has been similar to that of Elder Bednar in that the latter, more subtle line-upon-line revelation is more common than the more dramatic and immediate kind of revelation and that this causes us to unnecessarily question our ability to receive revelation. As Elder Bednar explained: I have talked with many individuals who question the strength of their personal testimony and underestimate their spiritual capacity because they do not receive frequent, miraculous, or strong impressions. Perhaps as we consider the experiences of Joseph in the Sacred Grove, of Saul on the road to Damascus, and of Alma the Younger, we come to believe something is wrong with or lacking in us if we fall short in our lives of these well-known and spiritually striking examples. If you have had similar thoughts or doubts, please know that you are quite normal. Just keep pressing forward obediently and with faith in the Savior. As you do so, you “cannot go amiss” (D&C 80:3).16 The effects of this more common type of line-by-line revelation, though less obvious, are nonetheless equally powerful. President Joseph F. Smith once stated: As a boy . . . I would frequently . . . ask the Lord to show me some marvelous thing, in order that I might receive a testimony. But the Lord withheld marvels from me, and showed me the truth, line upon line, . . . until he made me to know the truth from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and until doubt and fear had been absolutely purged from me.17 So take heart. You are likely doing better than you think. I urge you in that regard to take some time in the coming weeks to ponder and reflect on times when you may have received revelation and on times when you were influenced by the Holy Ghost and you may not have fully recognized it. Then I would urge you to record those events. This will not only make you more aware of inspired messages that you have received but will increase your confidence that you can receive further revelation. Still, even if we are doing better than we think, President Nelson’s challenge—and our goal of inspiring learning—is to improve our ability to receive and recognize revelation: in President Nelson’s words, it is “to increase [our] spiritual capacity to receive revelation” and “to do the spiritual work required to enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost and hear the voice of the Spirit more frequently and more clearly.”18 Thus, if it is true that many of us are doing better than we think, it is equally true that all of us need to do better—regardless of our current level of performance. An Experience Involving Both Heart and Mind There are a number of things we can do to meet President Nelson’s charge to increase our ability to receive revelation. Let me suggest just a few. We can increase our ability to receive and recognize revelation by understanding the principles and implications of the revelatory process set forth in section 8 of the Doctrine and Covenants. We are all familiar with the key verses in which the Lord described this process to Oliver Cowdery: Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation.19 There are several key principles contained in this brief description. Among them is the fact that revelation is an experience that involves both our heart and our mind, which I believe symbolically represent our spirit and our body. We can improve our ability to receive revelation if we better prepare both our spirits and our bodies for such experiences. Spiritual Preparation Spiritual preparation includes daily scripture study, daily prayer, keeping the commandments, sacrament meeting attendance, Sabbath-day observance, and regular temple worship. These are all familiar tasks that we are regularly counseled to attend to. I hope, however, that repetition does not cause us to undervalue the significance of these actions. We repeatedly emphasize such spiritually enhancing activities because they are so important. As President Nelson explained: Nothing opens the heavens quite like the combination of increased purity, exact obedience, earnest seeking, daily feasting on the words of Christ in the Book of Mormon, and regular time committed to temple and family history work.20 Spiritual preparation facilitates revelation. Physical Preparation We talk less about physical preparation to receive revelation, but it is also important. As President Boyd K. Packer once observed: What you learn spiritually depends, to a degree, on how you treat your body. That is why the Word of Wisdom is so important.21 We hear stories about how adherence to the Word of Wisdom leads to the promised physical blessing that we will “run and not be weary, and . . . walk and not faint.”22 However, I believe we do not often enough focus on the at least equally important spiritual blessing promised to those who adhere to its precepts: that they will “find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures,”23 many of which are accessed by revelation.24 Discovery of such hidden treasures through revelation is exactly the kind of inspiring learning we hope each of you frequently experience at BYU. In addition to adhering to the principles of physical health outlined in section 89 of the Doctrine and Covenants, we can increase our capacity to receive and recognize revelation by following the admonition the Lord provided in the immediately preceding section: “Retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated.”25 I know, you are saying, “Really?” Candor requires that I admit that when I was in college, I did not consider myself a “morning person.” I never took a class earlier than nine in the morning because any time before that seemed way too early. But over time I have come to find that early-morning time is sacred, a time when few people interrupt and, more important, my mind is more open and “invigorated”—or alive—to new ideas and spiritual impressions. I have learned to keep a notepad by my bedside—as thoughts and ideas often come early in the morning—and to make scripture study and prayer my first order of morning business. I urge you to consider the same. Feelings That Come into Minds and Hearts In addition to clarifying the spiritual and physical aspects of revelation, the description in section 8 also highlights that, as Elder Bednar explained, “the spirit of revelation typically functions as thoughts and feelings that come into our minds and hearts by the power of the Holy Ghost.”26 President Packer similarly observed: Perhaps the single greatest thing I learned from ­reading the Book of Mormon is that the voice of the Spirit comes as a feeling rather than a sound. You will learn, as I have learned, to “listen” for that voice that is felt rather than heard.27 Set aside time and space when you can focus on being open to those thoughts and feelings. Turn off the music; pause Netflix; take out your earbuds. Find time to listen to your feelings. You may wonder how to adequately discern whether such feelings are from God or are merely your own internal thoughts and wishes. That is a topic worthy of greater time than we have today, but let me make two observations. First, as in so many aspects of our mortal ­existence, we can learn from our own experience how to make such distinctions, if we pay attention. The Prophet Joseph Smith once stated: A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the ­principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus.28 Part of the purpose of our mortal life is to help us learn from our own experiences. This principle applies to our ability to receive and recognize revelation. Second, when we feel impressed to do something good for someone else, there is little need to deliberate about the source of the feeling. The ancient prophet Mormon made clear that such promptings are always from the Lord: That which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God.29 Never suppress a feeling to help others. It is among the clearest forms of revelation. Moreover, such generous acts often facilitate further revelation. As President Henry B. Eyring recently observed, “We receive the Holy Spirit best when we are focused on serving others.”30 Revelation in God’s Time and in God’s Way There are other things that we can do to enhance our ability to receive revelation, including expanding our understanding of the truth that revelation comes in the manner and timing that God determines. We need to recognize that His goal is not just to give us instruction but to help us become like Him. At times this perfecting process requires that we work harder, study things out more, and even act when we are not 100 percent sure that we are right. As President Nelson once observed, “Revelation comes at the frontier of knowledge and experience.”31 We will often need to stretch our souls beyond what we think is possible before revelation comes. As Oliver Cowdery learned, it is not merely a matter of asking.32 Answers may be slow in coming, not because we are doing something wrong but because Heavenly Father is leaving it up to our agency33 or because He has already given us the answer and wants us to learn how that prior answer came34 or because we need to learn something more before the answer makes sense to us. But please know that even in those times when the heavens seem silent, there are explanations that will become clear over time if we will but trust God. As Elder Richard G. Scott once explained: What do you do when you have prepared carefully, have prayed fervently, waited a reasonable time for a response, and still do not feel an answer? . . . When . . . you need to act, proceed with trust. As you are sensitive to the promptings of the Spirit, one of two things will certainly occur at the appropriate time: either the stupor of thought will come, indicating an improper choice, or the peace or the burning in the bosom will be felt, confirming that your choice was correct. When you are living righteously and are acting with trust, God will not let you proceed too far without a warning impression if you have made the wrong decision.35 In the end, the one thing we can do to increase our ability to receive revelation is to trust God more—to increase our faith in Him. As President Nelson observed, “The most important truth the Holy Ghost will ever witness to you is that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God.”36 Revelation will increase as we focus more on Christ as we follow His direction to look unto Him “in every thought.”37 As we do so, He will—in His own time and in His own way—bless us with revelation that will lead to not only inspiring learning but also to eternal exaltation. I witness that He lives and that this promise is sure, and I do so in the holy name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> To a large extent, the depth of our eternal happiness will be determined by the quality of our relationships with others. My message today is summarized in a familiar scripture, Genesis 2:18, in which the Lord declared, “It is not good that . . . man should be alone.” I suppose most of you upon hearing this will think that I am about to deliver the standard BYU speech on marriage. You are wrong—well, at least mostly wrong. Although the principles I address will apply with full force to marriage, I wish to speak about a broader truth, one recognized in both secular studies and gospel teaching. It is that no one can flourish in isolation and that the quality of our relationships with others will ultimately determine our level of fulfillment and happiness in both this mortal existence and the life to come. It is in this sense that it is not good for man—or woman—to be alone. I learned this insight from an unexpected source about twenty years ago. I was ­helping teach a class at the University of Chile about that country’s law dealing with indigenous ­people. Members of the class included not only law students but also a number of leaders of indigenous communities, principally Mapuche communities from southern Chile. Each week after the regular class, these Mapuche leaders would teach the ­students—and the ­professors—various aspects of Mapuche culture. On one occasion the topic was Mapuche cosmology, or religion. One Mapuche leader began the discussion by noting that the Mapuche understanding of the meaning of life was quite different from that of the traditional Western world and that that difference could be summarized in part by differences in the Mapuche understanding of the nature of God and the devil. He explained that while the traditional Christian belief was that God was a single, solitary person, Mapuche belief was that the principal deity consisted of four individuals: an older man, an older woman, a younger man, and a younger woman. He explained that to him this was a much more logical view of the world, as everyone knew that happiness can exist only if we share it with other people. By contrast, he noted, the principal evil spirit in the Mapuche cosmology existed all by himself. And that was what made him evil. His eternal destiny was to be alone, and it was his loneliness that made him so angry and destructive. There is some disagreement among scholars as to the accuracy of this community leader’s view of Mapuche religion,1 but his insight about the effect of being alone in the world draws support from other disciplines. As Martin E. P. Seligman reported, “Social neuroscientist John Cacioppo has argued [that] loneliness is such a disabling condition that it [is clear] that the pursuit of relationships is a rock-bottom fundamental to human well-being.”2 Now I am fully aware that there are times when we want to be by ourselves; when we have to get away from others; when our roommates, classmates, brothers and sisters, and others just drive us crazy. All of us can relate, at one time or another, to the character in Jean Paul Sartre’s play No Exit when he observed that “hell is other people.”3 But in the long run, the converse is also true—heaven is other people. Heaven will be heaven because of the other people who will be there. And experiencing heaven on earth will ultimately depend, to a large degree, on the quality of our relationships with others. This truth has been recognized by a number of different people approaching the issue from a number of different perspectives. In 2002 Dr. Martin Seligman, the father of positive psychology, published a book entitled Authentic Happiness, in which he set forth his ideas about how people could achieve the maximum amount of human satisfaction and happiness. Nine years later he wrote another book entitled Flourish, in which he explained that his prior theory was incomplete. Among the missing elements—among the short list of things that people must have in order to truly flourish, according to Seligman—are positive relationships. Seligman explained: Very little that is positive is solitary. When was the last time you laughed uproariously? The last time you felt indescribable joy? The last time you sensed profound meaning and purpose? The last time you felt enormously proud of an accomplishment? Even without knowing the particulars of these high points of your life, I know their form: all of them took place around other people.4 Think about it. Whenever we ­experience something truly good in our lives, that feeling is enhanced when we share it with ­others—either in the very moment or at some future time. That is a universal truth. When Lehi partook of the fruit of the tree of life and found that “it filled [his] soul with exceedingly great joy,” his first desire was “that [his] family should partake of it also.”5 Lehi understood implicitly that he could not experience a fulness of joy by himself. His happiness could not be complete unless he could somehow share it with those he loved. To a large extent, the depth of our eternal happiness will be determined by the quality of our relationships with others. The clear fact is, no one will be exalted by him- or herself.6 Thus one of the purposes of this mortal existence—and therefore one of the purposes of your education at this university—is to develop both the skills and the attributes necessary to establish long-lasting, joyful relationships. That truth is reflected in the manner in which the Church is organized. As Elder Marlin K. Jensen once noted: The Church builds meetinghouses, not hermitages. From the beginning of the Restoration, the command has been for us to gather in communities, where we can learn to live in harmony and mutually support one another by honoring our baptismal covenants. . . . . . . The inspired organization of the Church . . . provides settings where we can develop socially. In Church callings, meetings, classes, quorums, councils, activities, and a variety of other opportunities for association, we develop the attributes and social skills that help prepare us for the social order that will exist in heaven.7 Indeed, our very concept of heaven is shaped by the notion of relationships. The authors of the lds.org Gospel Topics essay on “Becoming Like God” explain: Church members imagine exaltation less through images of what they will get and more through the relationships they have now and how those relationships might be purified and elevated.8 Latter-day scripture teaches the same message. In section 130 in the Doctrine and Covenants we read: That same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy.9 That scripture contains both a promise and a warning. The promise is that if we develop positive relationships during this mortal life and keep the commandments, those relationships will not end at death. Indeed, they will be enhanced. We will not only enjoy that same “sociality” in the world to come but it will then “be coupled with eternal glory,” thereby increasing both the temporal duration and the quality of those relationships. But there is also a warning in the scripture. If we fail to develop positive relationships in this life, they will not suddenly spring into existence in the next life. We will experience the “same sociality” in the next life as we did in this life. If we have done nothing to create eternal relationships during our mortal existence, we will not have any in the next phase—to our eternal sorrow. Thus my New Year’s plea is that in this coming year we all increase the number and quality of eternal relationships that exist in our lives. Yes, that includes marriage relationships for those who are married or are striving for that. But it also includes other relationships—­relationships with our roommates, our classmates, our teachers, our other family members, and even strangers in the community. Let me provide four suggestions on how to accomplish this goal. First, look for and take advantage of opportunities to develop positive relationships with others. These can be found in every aspect of your everyday life at the university. As already noted, the Church itself is organized in ways that present such opportunities. One of the distinguishing factors of the Church is its organization along geographic boundaries. Belonging to a ward organized in this fashion requires us to interact with people with whom, if left to ourselves, we would not otherwise associate. If you are from Los Angeles, being part of a ward may force you to meet and get to know someone you think is a “narrow-minded” Utah Mormon. If you are from Panguitch, it may cause you to get to know someone you may perceive as a “liberal” Mormon from New York. More important, being in a ward gives you opportunities to not only know them but to serve them and, consequently, to love them. Similar opportunities can be found in your school life. You are here with a remarkable group of fellow students. Take time to get to know them. Take time to get to know your faculty members. They too are remarkable. Some of them can become not only mentors but lifelong and eternal friends. Most of you will also interact with coworkers, either on or off campus. Get to know them; look for ways to serve them. As you look for those opportunities, pay ­particular attention to those who struggle to feel included—those who are on the margins of the group, either physically or emotionally. Their loneliness may not be obvious, but with spiritual sensitivity it can be discerned. They will be blessed by your efforts. Just as important, you will be blessed and changed as well. The BYU mission statement states that the first major educational goal for BYU is that “all students at BYU should be taught the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.”10 But like all the educational goals at BYU, that charge is not limited to the acquisition of abstract theoretical knowledge. The mission statement goes on to indicate that “all relationships within the BYU community should reflect devout love of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor.”11 Note the inclusive and active nature of that charge. All our ­relationships—those at Church, school, work, home, or anywhere else—are to reflect the Savior’s love. And that love is to include “a loving, genuine concern”—an active concern for all of those with whom we interact. There are few aspects of your education here that present more—and more ­meaningful—opportunities to meet President Henry B. Eyring’s challenge that we be “learners and lifters” at this university than to be actively concerned about the welfare of our neighbor.12 And let us not repeat the error of the lawyer who during Jesus’s time attempted to narrowly define who those neighbors are. The Savior’s response to the lawyer’s efforts was the parable of the good Samaritan, which makes it abundantly clear that our neighbors include not only our fellow BYU students but also all those with whom we interact within our broader community, whether they be local merchants or fans from other schools with whom we compete athletically. One of the few sad tasks of my role as president of this university is to receive letters from store owners, landlords, or visitors to our campus whose interaction with a very small minority of our university community have left them wondering how we can possibly call ourselves disciples of Christ. I don’t receive many of those letters, but even one or two demonstrate that we have room for improvement. Please treat others with the respect they deserve. That leads to my second suggestion. As we expand the group of people with whom we consciously seek to develop positive relationships, let us also expand our vision of who they really are. “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” clearly states: All human beings—male and female—are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.13 Note the universality of the words all and each. Everyone with whom we interact—even those with whom we disagree completely on fundamental issues of truth—is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents. And we need to treat them as such, even when we cannot otherwise agree with them on anything else. That same principle applies with particularity to those whom we love the most—our spouses and other family members. In that regard we would do well to reflect upon C. S. Lewis’s astute observation: It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. . . . It is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit.14 If we remember the nature of the beings with whom we interact, we are more likely to avoid two of the primary impediments to positive and eternal relationships in our digital age: ­distraction and anonymity. The former is evident when we divide our attention between those with whom we are physically present and those with whom we simultaneously interact online through texts and other messages. Surely if we were to be granted a personal audience with Heavenly Father, we would not take out our phones to check to see if someone else was trying to reach us electronically. If we remember the divine potential of all those with whom we interact, it may cause us to be more fully present and engaged with them when they are in our presence, rather than giving them only part of our attention, with the remainder reserved for our cell phone. At the other extreme, the anonymity of some social media platforms causes us to say things that we would never say to a divine being in person. Please keep in mind that what we communicate can wound one of God’s children, even when the source of that hurt is not revealed. Let all our interactions reflect the profound truth that we do live in a society of potential gods and goddesses. Third, we should develop our ability to take joy in the success of others. One of the ­opportunities—or challenges—in life comes when our peers achieve something that we had hoped to achieve for ourselves. How do we respond when it is our fellow study group member who gets the A instead of us? Or when our roommate is the one who gets asked out on a date while we sit at home alone? Or when a classmate gets the part in the play we had hoped to receive? At such times our natural reaction—or, better stated, the reaction of the natural man—is to feel envious and jealous. Such feelings destroy relationships. By contrast, responding positively in such circumstances strengthens our relationships in a productive and eternal way. Psychological studies have shown that “when an individual responds . . . constructively . . . to someone sharing a positive experience, love and friendship [between them] increase.”15 When we share in the joy of others, we not only come closer to them, but we lift our spirits as well. The ability to truly take joy in the success of others—and to communicate that joy to them—is a key attribute of a celestial life. Think about it. God’s greatest joy comes through the accomplishment of others. His work and glory is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of others.16 His ultimate happiness comes through His enjoyment of our success. By contrast, Satan’s desire is that others fail. That is what he enjoys. He is frustrated when others succeed. Thus how we respond to the success of others may be a telling measure of not only our ability to create eternal relationships but also what our ultimate destiny may be. This can be seen in two contrasting scenes from the Book of Mormon. In 1 Nephi 17, note how Laman and Lemuel responded to the frustrations of their brother Nephi as he attempted to construct a ship without their help. As Nephi recorded, “Now when [my brethren] saw that I began to be sorrowful they were glad in their hearts.”17 Laman and Lemuel rejoiced because their brother was sad. They celebrated his failure. There is a word for this kind of reaction: schadenfreude, which means to maliciously take joy in the misfortune of others.18 Schadenfreude is a common attitude in our world today—whether it be with respect to grades or sports or popularity. As one commentator noted, “We Americans love putting people up on pedestals and we love taking them down.”19 Such behavior is not a good thing for them or for us.20 Contrast Laman and Lemuel’s reaction to Nephi’s sorrow with that of the people of Alma the Elder, whose covenantal desire was “to mourn with those that mourn . . . and comfort those that stand in need of comfort.”21 How we respond to both the successes and the struggles of others provides a measure of both the nature of our relationship with them and the extent to which we are becoming like our Heavenly Father. I know this is asking a lot. I am asking you to become more of a Zion society—one in which we are “of one heart and one mind.”22 The scriptures indicate that the Lord is “well pleased that there should be a school in Zion.”23 I think that He would be equally well pleased if there was a little more Zion in His school. If we can make progress in that realm, we will be happier and more fulfilled. With that aspiration in mind, let me add a caveat. Positive eternal relationships come at a price. To truly love others, we have to become vulnerable in new ways. Our very love and concern for others means that we will be affected by their actions and circumstances in ways that at times will be soul stretching. It affects us more when they do not respond positively to our efforts to reach out to them. And we are wounded more deeply when they fail in their efforts. God Himself wept when He witnessed the struggles and failures of His children.24 Similarly, implicit in the covenant to bear one another’s burdens and to mourn with those who mourn is the certainty that if we love to that degree, we will more often have sorrow—for others. The choice to love others necessarily includes the choice to experience new and profound emotions of all kinds, both positive and negative. But the result is worth the price. Finally, if we are to develop positive and eternal relationships with others, we must first develop a positive and eternal relationship with our Heavenly Father and His Son Jesus Christ. As Elder Charles Didier explained: One of the real purposes of life is to become a friend of the Mediator, our Savior and Redeemer, . . . and then qualify to be called his friend.25 Like other positive relationships, this eternal relationship comes at a price, but one largely paid by the Savior in Gethsemane and on the cross. As a result of His great and infinite atoning sacrifice, Christ is able, with total empathy, to mourn with us in whatever circumstance we find ourselves. He has paid the ultimate price for ultimate friendship. Just as we sometimes get to know God through our extremities,26 Christ became fully acquainted with us through His extremities as part of the Atonement.27 As a result, He can teach and lift us as no one else can. In the long run there is a connection between our relationships with others and our relationship with Heavenly Father and Christ. Elder Marlin K. Jensen observed that “the quality of our daily relationships with others is the best indication of what we think about Christ.”28 I believe the Lord takes much more literally than we may think His observation that “inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”29 Because of His great love for all of God’s children, and as a result of the intimate and infinite nature of His great atoning sacrifice, Christ is personally affected—either negatively or positively—by the way we treat every single person with whom we come in contact. Thus the quality of our relationship with Him will depend to a great degree on the quality of our relationships with others. If we are more mindful of those relationships, if we do our best to reach out to ­others in ways that lift them, if we treat them as the potentially divine beings they are, and if their joys and sorrows become our joys and ­sorrows, then our lives will be more productive and more joyful. We will be filled with the love of Christ, and we will grow closer to Him, with the promise “that when he shall appear we shall be like him.”30 Of this I testify, in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> My prayer and plea for you, as you start this new semester, is that you choose to humble yourselves in all your endeavors; that you choose to be open to new ideas, including those that come by revelation; that you fully and accurately recognize your individual talents and potential as literal offspring of heavenly parents; that you recognize that same divinity in every other person with whom you interact; that you avoid contention; that you love and serve others; and, most of all, that you come to know the Savior more by making time for Him each and every day. Welcome to a new year and a new ­semester. I join Peggy in welcoming you back. It really is good to see you back here after what I hope has been a rejuvenating break for each of you. With a new COVID variant rapidly spreading, let me begin by urging you, once again, to get vaccinated and to follow all university and government health guidelines, including masking requirements. That is the best thing we can do to ensure that we can continue the semester without major disruption. Please consider the impact of your actions on the entire community and help make this semester a success for everyone. Humility Can Help Us Develop Academic, Social, and Leadership Skills As we begin the new semester, I would like to visit with you about a character trait that if adopted and refined will change your life dramatically. It will aid you in your academic work, it will enhance your social relationships, and it will better prepare you for future leadership roles. More important, it will help you enter and remain on the covenant path that leads to the fulfillment of your eternal destiny as children of heavenly parents. What is this remarkable trait? Humility. That answer may surprise some of you. Humility is one of the most underappreciated virtues in contemporary society, which devotes so much attention to self-promotion. Yet over the past two decades, there has been a significant increase in scholarly research about the positive impact that humility has on people’s ability to learn, lead, and relate to others. For example, in a 2016 journal article, researchers at Duke University described an experiment that demonstrated a connection between intellectual humility and recognition memory. As described by best-selling author Ashley Merryman: During the experiment, everyone [involved in the study] completed three tasks. First, they read a list of 40 statements on a range of controversial topics—everything from the military’s use of drone strikes, common core curricula in schools, to same-sex marriage. [Second,] they took a survey, measuring how familiar they were with topics such as Susan B. Anthony or Mount Rushmore. Though there was a catch [with this second task. Some of] the topics [on the list] were bogus—for example, there was a fictitious “Hamrick’s Rebellion.” Finally, participants read another list of 60 statements [some of which were on the first list]. They were to determine which statements were on the first list and which were new. . . . [The results were telling:] The intellectually humble took longer to read the first controversial ­statements—especially if the information ran counter to their beliefs. At the experiment’s end, they were ­better at identifying new statements. . . . Meanwhile, the intellectually arrogant skimmed through the reading. They were less accurate at identi­fying statements as new. . . . And the intellectually arrogant were more susceptible to the fake news items.1 In short, the humble were better at both identifying false information and remembering things they had learned before—skills that are very helpful in an academic setting. Other studies have identified additional ways in which humility aids in the learning process. As Merryman noted: Researchers observed that the intellectually humble have a constant desire to learn and improve. They embrace ambiguity and the unknown. They like getting new information. They even enjoy finding out when they’re wrong. And when in trouble, they’re more willing to accept help. [As a result,] humble college students have been found to be higher in academic achievement. They improved more over the course of a ­semester, and they got better grades.2 While the proud may garner more worldly attention, the humble do better academically. Those who are humble also have an advantage in social relationships. According to one study, those who are “humble are rated as more attractive date-potential.”3 The humble also have lower rates of infidelity. And because they’re willing to address their shortcomings, their partners are more forgiving and understanding, [which leads] to longer lasting relationships.4 In other words, humility leads to more productive, long-lasting social relationships. And there is extensive research—led in no small part by BYU professor Bradley P. Owens5—indicating that humble leadership in a variety of endeavors, “from the military to manufacturing to ministry,”6 leads to better organizational outcomes. Humility can therefore help us develop academic, social, and leadership skills that will aid us now and into the future. But what is humility, and how do we develop it? Six Characteristics That Describe Humble People While the exact definition of humility in the academic literature varies somewhat from study to study, most studies focus on “a set of characteristics that . . . describe humble people.”7 Many such descriptions can be traced to [June] Tangney’s . . . list of six central features of humility: [1] an accurate assessment of oneself, [2] acknowledgment of one’s mistakes and limitations, [3] openness to other viewpoints and ideas, [4] keeping one’s accomplishments and abilities in perspective, [5] low self-focus, and [6] appreciating the value of all things, including other people.8 Note that the first characteristic—“an accurate assessment of oneself”—does not mean that the humble are lacking in skills, intellect, or talent. True humility does not imply lack of ability. In fact, if there is any correlation between the two, it runs in the opposite direction. As Elder D. Todd Christofferson once observed: Those who have cultivated their capacities of mind and spirit, who have developed an uncommonly large store of knowledge and wisdom, are typically the most humble of men and women.9 Moreover, contrary to common misunderstanding, humility does not mean we should degrade or underestimate our abilities. If we undervalue our abilities and gifts, we will not be humble because we will not be accurately assessing ourselves, which is the first characteristic of humility. Quoting Pastor Ralph W. Sockman, Brent W. Webb explained this further in a talk given while he was serving as BYU’s academic vice president: “True humility is intelligent self-respect which keeps us from thinking too highly or too meanly of ourselves. . . .” The meek are capable of inspecting themselves objectively and are willing to do so, unafraid of what they will discover. Most of us are happy to recognize and have others recognize our own strengths. It takes the truly meek to look inside . . . and seek to openly characterize where we are.10 That kind of intellectual and personal honesty, combined with the other characteristics of humility, can greatly enhance our academic success by leading us to new discoveries and insights. And, as already noted, they also lead to better social relationships and leadership outcomes. Humility is therefore critical to individual success. But it is also of great relevance and need in our current institutional setting. As I hope all of you know, one of our current goals and challenges is to create an environment of belonging in which our “hearts [are] knit together . . . in love”11 and in which all feel they are a part of the community.12 In essence, we are trying to create Zion—or at least a Zion-like society. And one of the primary obstacles to achieving that lofty yet attainable goal is the contention that is so much a part of daily life in the world around us. In his classic talk more than thirty years ago, President Ezra Taft Benson powerfully taught that pride is both the principal barrier to building a Zion society and the principal cause of contention. He said, “Pride is the great stumbling block to Zion,” and then he added for emphasis, “I repeat: Pride is the great stumbling block to Zion.”13 He also tied pride to contention, noting: Another face of pride is contention. Arguments, fights, unrighteous dominion, generation gaps, divorces, spouse abuse, riots, and disturbances all fall into this category of pride.14 Having identified pride as the root cause of both contention and the failure to establish Zion, President Benson identified the root solution: “The antidote for pride,” he said, “is humility.”15 Last April, Elder David A. Bednar encouraged the university leaders to “be unique in ­striking at the root of important and timely issues” by focusing “on the spiritual and practical ­substance of solutions and not just on superficial ­symbolism.”16 I believe we can begin to fulfill that charge by individually and collectively working to develop and apply the qualities of Christlike ­humility. Doing so will help us eliminate the pride that is the root cause of contention and the primary barrier to establishing a Zion-like campus community. But there is something more at stake with humility than just success in our academic, social, and career endeavors—or even more than providing fundamental insight and direction on the important challenges we currently face on campus. In the long run, our individual eternal destiny depends on our humility. The Eternal Importance of Humility Christ taught that those who “humble [themselves] shall be exalted.”17 He promised that He would “make weak things become strong unto them”18; that He would “give [them] answer[s] to [their] prayers”19; and that “inasmuch as they [are] humble they might be made strong, and blessed from on high, and receive knowledge from time to time.”20 In short, as Elder Neal A. Maxwell once observed, “Our humility and teachability are premiere determinants of our progress and our happiness.”21 With that understanding, one can begin to see the truth in what many throughout history have expressed: humility is the foundation of all other virtues.22 With that more complete understanding of the eternal importance and benefits of humility, it is striking to me that the six characteristics of humility often listed in the academic literature are given deeper meaning when viewed through the lens of gospel truths.23 For example, from a gospel perspective, the humility that manifests itself by us accurately assessing ourselves will not only help us identify our weaknesses but will also help us understand our divine potential. This understanding, along with the promised help of the Savior, gives us confidence that we can overcome those weaknesses. Thus, rather than injuring our self-image, “humility,” in the words of one scholar, “lifts us up from despair to a proper understanding of our own worth.”24 Similarly, when the humble attitude that causes us to acknowledge our own mistakes and limitations is viewed in the light of gospel truths, it functions as a key component of the repentance process on which our ultimate exaltation is dependent.25 In the same vein, when viewed from a gospel perspective, being open to other viewpoints and ideas includes openness to insights that come through divine revelation. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord instructed: Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord. . . . For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite.26 The humility that is evidenced by keeping one’s accomplishments and abilities in perspective likewise takes on deeper meaning when added to the gospel truths that we are dependent on the Lord for all our accomplishments27 and that mortality is just one phase of our eternal existence.28 This in turn not only increases our humility but also reveals such humility as the key to accomplishing “mighty miracles”29 as we enlist the help of the Lord in our righteous endeavors. Finally, the low self-focus and the appreciation for the value of other things, especially other people, that characterize humility in academic literature also link humility to gospel truths. By focusing less on ourselves and more on others, we will experience the refining and exalting power of service.30 And appreciating the value of other people will help us understand and keep the second great commandment to love others31—each of whom are also beloved children of God.32 We Must Choose for Ourselves to Be Humble The key determinative role of humility in our eternal progress is evidenced by the fact that God will, at times, humble us, hoping that the experience will cause us to change.33 But in the long run, the result is up to us. We must choose for ourselves to be humble. Among the many scriptures dealing with humility, there is a subset that describes times and ways in which people humble themselves.34 It is when we voluntarily submit our will to His, when we choose to humble ourselves, that God can turn the temporal kind of humility academic scholars have examined into an eternal transformational attribute that becomes part of our permanent natures. In this and in all things, Christ provided the perfect example. In explaining why Jesus Christ chose to be baptized, Nephi explained: Notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments.35 This was not an isolated event in the life of the Savior. Throughout His mortal ministry, Christ made clear that it was His Father’s will, not His own, that governed His actions. In the Gospel of John alone, there are at least eleven instances in which Jesus clearly taught His disciples that, despite His omnipotence, He had come not to do His own will nor to promote His own glory but that of His Father.36 Indeed, the very setting of Christ’s birth and mortal ministry evidenced His choice to humble Himself. As one summary of Saint Augustine’s teachings put it: Although he was equal to the Father, Christ did not come as a powerful ruler or hero. He was born in a stable, in an obscure village; his parents were unknown and undistinguished people of low social standing. He slept “in a feeding trough.”37 It was Christ’s choice to humble Himself by coming to earth for our sake that the angel described to Nephi as “the condescension of God.”38 Our conscious choice to humble ourselves by submitting our will to God’s is the essence of true humility. In fact, willingness to submit to God’s will—to “let God prevail,”39 to use President Russell M. Nelson’s wonderful phrase—is the single best definition of what true humility is.40 Our choice to let God prevail in our lives both evidences and produces the exalting power of true humility. Developing and practicing that kind of humility takes great courage and strength41 because it requires us to surrender to God the one thing that is truly, uniquely our own—our will.42 It takes what one U.S. Navy SEAL commander called ­having a “backbone of humility.”43 “Recognize What True Courage Looks Like” Such acts of strength and courage are often overlooked in part because they can be misunderstood as acts of weakness when judged by the world’s standards. I learned this in a powerful way while serving as a young missionary in the Mexican town of Ciudad Acuña, which is located just across the border from Del Rio, Texas. At the time, we did not have a chapel in Acuña. So we were given permission to cross the border into Del Rio—where there was a chapel with a baptismal font—to perform our baptisms. As near as I could tell, there was no formal arrangement for such border crossings. The U.S. missionaries had visas that permitted us to cross back and forth, but those who were to be baptized often did not. In what was clearly a different immigration era than we have now, we simply vouched for those individuals, and the border officials took note to make sure the same people returned after the baptisms were performed. On one such occasion, after ­enthusiastically accepting our invitation to be baptized, the Hernandez family—a young husband and wife—accompanied us to the border crossing. The officials took down their names, and we proceeded to the chapel. All was going well until we opened the door to the closet where the baptismal clothing was stored. There were a fair number of choices for men’s clothing, but Brother Hernandez was a large man. After several attempts to put on the largest pants that were there, it became clear that there was nothing even close to a fit among the choices. I began to panic a bit. The border guards had let the Hernandez family cross without papers so they could be ­baptized, but they were very unlikely to accept that justification more than once. I didn’t know what to do. Suddenly Brother Hernandez pointed to the closet containing the women’s baptismal clothing and asked, “What about that?” He was pointing to a large, white baptismal gown on the bottom shelf of the women’s section. Not knowing what else to do, I said, “Let’s try it.” He and I then retired to the dressing room, where I put on my baptismal clothes. I couldn’t restrain myself from watching out of the corner of my eye to see how things were going with Brother Hernandez. He was struggling mightily to get into the dress, wiggling first this way and then that while tugging on the dress to pull it down. At that point, I thought to myself, “Brother Hernandez, if you only knew how silly you looked, you would be embarrassed, and you would probably just call off the baptism.” Immediately a clear voice that was not my own came into my mind. It said: “He knows exactly how silly he looks, and he does not care. He knows God wants him to be baptized, and he is determined to do that no matter how silly he looks to others. You should be embarrassed that you don’t recognize what true courage looks like.” I have read of dramatic demonstrations of courage, such as Parley P. Pratt’s account of the Prophet Joseph Smith rebuking the guards in the Richmond jail,44 but none has had more of an impression on me than the courage and strength of a humble disciple of Christ that I witnessed that night. Brother Hernandez chose to humble ­himself—to let God prevail—and he was determined to do what God wanted, no matter what the cost. He demonstrated a backbone of humility that continues to inspire me today, forty years later. “It Takes Both Faith and Courage to Let God Prevail” So, how do we develop this kind of backbone of humility? We develop it by coming to understand humility more deeply and more accurately and then by choosing to humble ourselves by striving to understand and follow God’s will for us. In his 1989 talk, President Benson gave some specific examples of how this can happen. Listen to see if any of them applies to you: We can choose to humble ourselves by conquering enmity toward our brothers and sisters, esteeming them as ourselves, and lifting them as high or higher than we are. . . . We can choose to humble ourselves by receiving counsel and chastisement. . . . We can choose to humble ourselves by forgiving those who have offended us. . . . We can choose to humble ourselves by rendering selfless service. . . . We can choose to humble ourselves by going on missions and preaching the word that can humble others. . . . We can choose to humble ourselves by getting to the temple more frequently. We can choose to humble ourselves by confessing and forsaking our sins and being born of God. . . . We can choose to humble ourselves by loving God, submitting our will to His, and putting Him first in our lives.45 Let me add one more, drawing on the words of our current prophet: We can choose to humble ourselves by consistently and consciously responding to President Nelson’s urgent plea to “mak[e] time for the Lord . . . each and every day.”46 As President Nelson explained: It takes both faith and courage to let God prevail. . . . It takes consistent, daily effort to develop personal habits to study the gospel, to learn more about . . . Jesus Christ, and to seek and respond to personal revelation.47 It takes all of those things for us to become humble. My prayer and plea for you, as you start this new semester, is that you choose to humble yourselves in all your endeavors; that you choose to be open to new ideas, including those that come by revelation; that you fully and accurately recognize your individual talents and potential as literal offspring of heavenly parents; that you recognize that same divinity in every other person with whom you interact; that you avoid contention; that you love and serve others; and, most of all, that you come to know the Savior more by making time for Him each and every day. As you do so, you will develop the powerful and exalting Christlike characteristic of humility, and, as a result, your life will be more full of joy. I so promise, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. “However, at this time, acting entirely on my own and without authority from anyone else, I hereby confer upon each and every one of you the title of super graduate. You have earned this title by being resilient, durable, and adaptable throughout a global pandemic that has affected this university more than any health crisis in our lifetimes.” In 1964, following its success with the Frisbee and the Hula-Hoop, toy manufacturer Wham-O introduced a new toy that also dominated the market for some time—the Super Ball. The Super Ball was a small, dense ball with amazing rebound capacity. Dropped from a height, it would bounce back almost all the way to its original position,1 thereby extending its bounce time much longer than that of ordinary rubber balls2 and making it seem to children like it would keep bouncing almost forever. Thrown to the ground “by an average adult, it [could] fly over a three-story building.”3 Thrown indoors, the ball would careen around a room at great speed, suddenly changing direction in dramatic fashion. The Super Ball was an enormously popular product. Wham-O produced “170,000 balls per day at the height of the craze.”4 And “McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor to President Lyndon Johnson, purchased super balls for sixty members of his staff, apparently as much to help them reduce stress as for entertainment.”5 The rebound ability of the Super Ball—which was the secret to its popularity—was due mainly to the material from which it was made, a “synthetic rubber invented . . . by chemist Norman Stingley,” which he called Zectron.6 The material gave the ball what scientists call a high coefficiency of restitution—the measure of how close to its original position a ball will bounce if merely dropped instead of thrown, a measure some call resilience or resiliency.7 However, the compound by itself had its limits. Stingley “first offered his invention to the Bettis Rubber Company, for whom he worked at the time, but they turned it down because the material was not very durable.”8 Wham-O noted the same problem. Wham-O’s president explained that the new Zectron ball “always had that marvelous springiness. . . . But it had a tendency to fly apart. We’ve licked that [problem] with a very high-pressure technique for forming it.”9 The Zectron compound was vulcanized with sulfur at a very high temperature and formed under thousands of pounds of pressure per square inch.10 The introduction of great pressure into the process made the product more long-lasting, making it both resilient and durable. Many of you graduates may have felt like a Super Ball this last year—thrown around at great speed, changing direction dramatically and feeling like the bouncing would never end. It has been a tumultuous year. But, like the Super Ball, you have been resilient and durable. That resilience and durability is mainly due to the material of which you are made—your identity, your character, and the skills and talents you have acquired and refined during your time at BYU. Each of you is a beloved child of God with “a divine nature and destiny.”11 Each of you came to BYU with talents and character formed in the years before you arrived on campus. And, hopefully, each of you has learned things here that will help you to develop your skills, talents, and character in ways that will enable you to better pursue your eternal, divine destiny. But, like the Super Ball, part of your resilience and durability is the result of the challenges you have faced, especially this past year. While extreme pressure and temperature are never pleasant, they can be formative and strengthening. At the most recent general conference, President Russell M. Nelson observed, “Difficult trials often provide opportunities to grow that would not have come in any other way.”12 I trust that many of you will have seen that principle in action this past year and throughout your experience here at BYU. It is interesting that to differentiate its product from ordinary rubber balls, Wham-O chose a simple adjective in its name: super—a word that has a long and broad language-usage history. Super is a word that is used in more than fifty languages today.13 You could say super and be understood in Croatian, Dutch, and Norwegian—and in Hmong, Swahili, and Zulu.14 It is an amazingly universal word. And in English, at least, it seems to be an acceptable modifier of almost anything: superglue, Super Bowl, superhero, superstar, and, lately, super-spreader. The word comes from the Latin term super.15 And from the beginning, super has been defined, among other things, as “above, over, beyond,” or of the “highest grade.”16 Its usage in the English language has ebbed and flowed over time, as indicated by an n-gram measuring the number of times the word has appeared in the historical Google Books archive by year and showing how often the word super has appeared in the database from 1800 until 2019.17 Like the Super Ball, the word super seems to bounce back into popular usage over and over again. It is a word that is resilient, durable, and very adaptable18—therefore, a word that applies fully to today’s graduates. In a moment, with full authorization and approval from the board of trustees, I will officially bestow academic degrees upon each of you graduates. However, at this time, acting entirely on my own and without authority from anyone else, I hereby confer upon each and every one of you the title of “super graduate.” You have earned this title by being resilient, durable, and adaptable throughout a global pandemic that has affected this university more than any health crisis in our lifetimes. Now, before you take out your Sharpies and add this title to your formal diploma or update your résumé to add it to the lists of honors you have earned, I should note that the conferral of this title carries with it a threefold responsibility. First, there is one more assignment that you will need to complete. President Nelson recently invited us to make a list of things the Lord wants us to learn from our experience during the pandemic, to consider that list, and then to share it with those we love.19 In a similar vein, I ask you to make a list of experiences that you have had this past year that have increased your ability to meet challenges in your life. The BYU mission statement declares that, as a result of their experience here, BYU graduates should be “broadly prepared individual[s]” who are “capable of meeting personal challenge and change.”20 Surely there is at least one thing that has happened in this last unique year that you can identify as contributing to your BYU education in that way. Write it down and share it with others. Second, I invite you to take advantage of future opportunities you will have to fulfill the next phrase in the BYU mission statement. According to the mission statement, the kind of “broadly prepared individual” who graduates from BYU should “not only be capable of meeting personal challenge and change but will also bring strength to others in the tasks of home and family life, social relationships, civic duty, and service to mankind.”21 The Lord has not provided this university and the experiences you have had here merely for your own benefit. If you want to be a true super graduate, you should look for ways you can use the skills, talents, and knowledge you have gained and refined here to benefit others—to “improve”22 the world, as our mission statement puts it. We are all familiar with the sign on the entrance to campus, exhorting us to “enter to learn” and “go forth to serve.” That injunction is fully applicable—especially applicable—to super graduates. Third, and finally, a genuine super graduate will recognize that true strength, resilience, durability, adaptability, and every other good gift come from God23 and that our ability to develop and use those gifts is enhanced as we follow the example of His Son, Jesus Christ. As we look unto Christ in every thought, we will find the strength and inspiration to become truly super. I trust that each of you graduates can accomplish each of these three goals, just as you have satisfied each of the requirements for the incredible achievement that we celebrate today. So, congratulations, class of 2021, super graduates of BYU. May the Lord bless you with super abilities to love and serve others. As you do so, you will live a super life that will extend for all eternity. This is my prayer for you, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> As important and as powerful as it is to learn some truth or to do some good act, it is much more important to be true and to be good. If you become a true and good spouse, parent, child, sibling, co-worker, or friend—and ultimately realize your divine potential as sons and daughters of heavenly parents—your higher education that has begun but not ended here will be a true success. This is my first graduation ceremony as president of the university. As you might imagine, I have given a little thought to what graduation ceremonies are all about. In some respects, a graduation ceremony is a rather odd event. While the graduation ceremony had its origins in Europe, it is now largely an American phenomenon. As Robert Pippin, a philosophy professor at the University of Chicago, once noted on a similar occasion: All modern developed nations have universities and some sort of procedure or exam for marking the end of study, but virtually no other nation in the world has graduation ceremonies (the exception is some in England). . . . We Americans, uniquely in all the world, are crazy about such ceremonies. We even have them . . . for graduation from kindergarten, first grade, fourth grade, eighth grade, high school, driving school, secretarial school, dog obedience school, and so on.1 To make the matter even more odd, even though this is mostly an American ceremony, we dress in ways that hardly any Americans—except perhaps priests, judges, or individuals we would consider to be deranged—would ever think about dressing.2 The ceremonial garb we wear today did at one point have some practical significance. In medieval Europe many ordinary people wore long-sleeved gowns or robes to provide warmth in poorly heated buildings. They also wore hoods, which they could pull over their heads when it became too cold. Over time, distinctive gowns and hoods were developed for the various professions, trades, and religious orders. Because most of the professors at early universities in Italy, France, and England were clerics, formal academic wear came to resemble that of the early clergy. However, once someone figured out how to heat buildings properly, most people abandoned the gown-and-hood look for something more practical. Status conscious as they were, academics “still tried to mark themselves off as in a special group,” as Professor Pippin noted, and faculty and students at most universities “continued to attend class and teach in what had by then . . . become the basic university attire, the black gown.”3 By the end of the nineteenth century practicality overcame status symbols, and the practice of wearing academic robes to class every day slowly died out, even in America. However, Americans continued to hang on to the tradition of donning the garb for graduation ceremonies. And, in typical American fashion, marketing forces soon began to influence the practice. Professor Pippin explained: Mr. Gardner Cottrell Leonard, a young man of industry and sound commercial sense, . . . had not been happy with the shape and fit of his graduation gown, worn at Williams College in 1883, and he spent the next year traveling across Europe, researching medieval attire and the design of gowns and hats. For the next ten years or so, he had developed and promoted the business of designing and supplying such gowns, and when a meeting of college officials was held at Columbia in 1895 to decide on uniform standards . . . , Mr. Leonard was the technical expert . . . and very successful promoter of all this regalia.4 The standards set at that meeting were revised over time, and there is today—and I am not making this up—an academic costume code that prescribes the style of the sleeves, the nature of the material, the color of the hood and width of its binding, and the type and color of the tassel, all according to the institution and the degree awarded.5 So here we sit—or, I guess, there you sit and here I stand—“dressed,” in the words of Professor Pippin, “like thirteenth-century monks thanks partly to the marketing skills of the son of a dry goods manufacturer in Albany, New York” in the late 1800s.6 And we do so in order to go through a ceremony largely abandoned by the rest of the modern world. How does one explain this? Anthropologists, philosophers, sociologists, and, I suppose, even psychologists could provide a variety of interesting answers to that question. Let me offer just one. I suggest we are willing to endure what might seem like an odd custom because ceremonies help us mark transition points in our lives, making it clear to us (and to others) that we have finished one important phase of our lives and are now entering another. Thus we celebrate not only what you have accomplished here in the past few years but, more important, the fact that you are moving on to a new stage of life in which—because of what you have experienced and learned here—you will be prepared to accomplish even more. That is the reason why—even though you are finishing your formal education here—this ceremony is called a commencement rather than a termination. Almost all societies have some kind of ceremony (either formal or informal) to mark life-stage transitions. Ceremonies like this one help us reflect on what we have learned and on how that learning has prepared us for the challenges that lie ahead. As you ponder on those matters today, let me suggest that, as someone once observed, “the question to be asked at the end of an educational step or sequence is not what has the student learned but what has the student become.”7 As I am sure you have already discovered—and if you have not, you soon will—there is a vast difference between knowing something and doing something. You may understand the theoretical principles of physics, for example, and still not be able to construct a rocket ship. The gap between theory and practice is sometimes wide. But the observation goes one step further, drawing a contrast not just between knowing and doing but also between doing and being. That distinction is particularly important at a university like this one whose mission is not just to convey knowledge to students but also “to assist [them] in their quest for perfection and eternal life.”8 In the long run, your success at BYU—and your success in the next phases of your life—will be measured not by what you have learned from some textbook. You will soon forget much of that, if it wasn’t forgotten the minute you walked out of the final. Nor will your success be determined solely by what you have done here. Your grade point average, for example, will matter less and less as time goes on. (For some that is good news.) Your success, here and beyond, will ultimately be measured by what you become, by your character. The real question to be asked at a ceremony of this kind is “How close are we to reaching our full potential?” The BYU mission statement indicates that this is a place where “the full realization of human potential is pursued.”9 And that potential is greater than many in the world imagine, because all human beings are “beloved spirit son[s] or daughter[s] of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny.”10 As important and as powerful as it is to learn some truth or to do some good act, it is much more important to be true and to be good. If you become a true and good spouse, parent, child, sibling, co-worker, or friend—and ultimately realize your divine potential as sons and daughters of heavenly parents—your higher education that has begun but not ended here will be a true success. Reminding ourselves of these truths and that potential is reason aplenty to engage in this distinctive ceremony. May each of you realize that full potential is my prayer in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <start> I can predict with a high degree of certainty that there will be many times in your postgraduate life when you will face decisions that will ultimately be determined by whether you are motivated by pride and riches on the one hand or whether you are moved to act consistently with truths that resonate in your heart and in your mind on the other. Graduation ceremonies have been occurring at BYU since 1877; some have been more memorable than others. The graduation exercises of 1899 were unusual in several respects, especially when compared to the ceremonies we are holding today. The venue was smaller. It was held in the Provo Stake Tabernacle. And the procession was a bit longer. It went five blocks from the Academy Building to the tabernacle. The nature of the student achievements highlighted was also different from what we see today. We have students today who have worked on neonatal ventilators, NASA solar panel arrays, and the search for a cure to Alzheimer’s disease. By contrast, in 1899 the highlight was an “exhibit of handwork of the students from needle work and drawing to hardwood desks and bookcases.”1 Twenty students were honored in that 1899 ceremony, and only six of those received college degrees.2 Today we celebrate more than 6,000 graduates, all of whom will receive college degrees. One of the other distinctions of the 1899 ceremony was the debut of a song, the lyrics3 of which were written by Annie Pike,4 a student who would graduate the following year.5 Annie was a non-LDS student at what was then Brigham Young Academy. She was born and raised in Provo, her father having arrived here to serve as the medical superintendent of the Territorial Insane Asylum.6 Annie entered Brigham Young Academy when she was sixteen and graduated four years later.7 After studying at the University of Michigan, she returned to the Academy to teach in the English Department for a period of time.8 Annie had a way with words from an early age. When she was eleven, she issued her own newspaper, “writing the editorials, stor[ies], poem[s], and locals all herself.”9 According to one account, Annie would sometimes leave her dish-washing [chores] quite unceremoniously and be gone for a number of minutes. Presently some member of the family would find her kneeling at a window sill, writing. “I came to write a line that just popped into my head,” she would say apologetically when discovered.10 We do not know whether the lyrics to the song sung during the 1899 graduation exercise simply popped into Annie’s head or came by some other means, but we do know that the song she wrote as a twenty-year-old Brigham Young Academy student caught on. It was originally called the “Academy Marching Song,” but it eventually became known as the “College Song.” While not as famous as the BYU fight song, with its familiar direction to “rise and shout,”11 the song was a favorite of some BYU presidents, including Rex E. Lee. The song is kept alive today mainly through the marching band, who, after every football game, temporarily belie their name by laying aside their instruments and then, while standing in place, singing a cappella the “College Song.” Some of you may recognize this: All hail the college that we love! At the throne, the throne of wisdom’s sway, Oh, let us lift our songs above The thronging multitude today. No pride nor riches here may sue: The head, the heart, the hand United must be true— Be true to thee, our white and blue, When they join our happy band. Chorus: Then cheer anew for the BYU! We’ve come to work, to live, to do. We’ll raise our standard—bear it through; Our hearts are true to the BYU.12 I share this brief trip down the graduation music memory lane because my short presidential graduation advice comes from two key phrases from Annie Pike’s lyrics in the “College Song.” My first admonition is found in the phrase “no pride nor riches here may sue.” Notwithstanding the last word in that phrase, I am not advocating a prohibition against certain kinds of legal actions. Instead, I am asking you to not let pride and riches dictate your future decisions. The same lesson is taught by way of warning in the scriptural injunction in section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants. We are familiar with the verses, yet we often skip over what may be the most important teaching in that scripture. Beginning with verse 34, we read: Behold, there are many called, but few are ­chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men.13 I believe that in our rush to learn the one lesson that follows—that priesthood and heavenly power are entirely dependent on adherence to principles of righteousness—we skip over what is so often the root cause of our failure to realize our full potential: that our hearts are set too much upon the things of the world and aspire to the honors of men. In other words, we allow pride and riches to become our motivation. When we are motivated solely by those two things—or either one of them—we lose the ability to call down the powers of heaven, and our eternal progress comes to a screeching halt. That may seem obvious now, but I can assure you from both personal experience and observation that the allure of pride and riches governs more human behavior than any of us would care to admit, and, when it does, we can easily find ourselves in places where we don’t want to be, both physically and spiritually. As you make career and other important decisions in life, I implore you to remember that at BYU we aspire to be a place where “no pride nor riches here may sue.” The antidote to the ever-present deviating attraction of pride and riches is found in the next phrase from Annie Pike’s “College Song” lyrics: “The head, the heart, the hand united must be true.” When we make decisions that are confirmed by our mind and spirit (our head and heart) and then take action based on those decisions (our hand), we will progress. When our head, our heart, and our hands align—when they are united—we can know that the course we are pursuing is likely to be true. The Aims of a BYU Education challenge us to provide an education that is “(1) spiritually strengthening, (2) intellectually enlarging, and (3) character building, leading to (4) lifelong learning and service.”14 In other words, our goal is to provide an education that aligns our hearts, our heads, and our hands in order to make the lives of others better. I hope we have provided you with that kind of education, and I urge you to capitalize on that foundation. I can predict with a high degree of certainty that there will be many times in your postgraduate life when you will face decisions that will ultimately be determined by whether you are motivated by pride and riches on the one hand or whether you are moved to act consistently with truths that resonate in your heart and in your mind on the other. My simple promise to you is that if you choose the latter over the former, your life will be more joyful, more fulfilling, and more eternally productive. Remember, at BYU “no pride nor riches here may sue: the head, the heart, the hand united must be true.” Nine years after she wrote those words, Annie Pike (now Annie Pike Greenwood) reflected on the impact that her education at BYU had had on her. She wrote: I once [had an acquaintance who] hailed . . . from [an ivy-league school and] was very scornful of the Brigham Young Academy, as it was then called. Upon one occasion, wishing to be particularly scathing, he made the following comment: “I think they must have spoiled you at that Brigham Young Academy.” It struck me forcibly that he was right. “They” had certainly spoiled me at “that Brigham Young Academy”—spoiled me as mother spoils her child—with kindness, encouragement, appreciation, charity—spoiled me so that I can never be content to take anything but the best the world has to give nor satisfied to give anything but the best that lies within me. By day and by night it comes upon me that I must fulfill all of which my teachers believed me capable. I thank God that hundreds of young people are being spoiled every year in the Brigham Young University.15 I hope that you have been spoiled in that way during your time here, that you will never be satisfied to give anything but the best that lies within you, and that you will fulfill all of which your teachers believe you capable. This will happen as you are guided not by pride and riches but by your heart, your head, and your hand united in truth. We love you. And we wish you the Lord’s blessings in all you do. You have been chosen to come forth at this time to bless the world. That you may do so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.