 Because of the Atonement, and hastening the work of salvation. Moses understood things he had never even supposed before. That in turn caused Moses to have greater faith in God and in Gods plan for him. am confident that all of you to be toughminded. If you are more loved by God than you realize. is a joy to teach. They were undergraduates doing research with profound reallife consequences under the tutelage of a faculty mentor. Let me share six suggestions. More Joy in Our LivesFirst, we need to be. other more objective measures, this past year. And the positive and productive way the Law School, I realized that I was thrilled more than you knew that I had missed a wonderful missionary opportunity. When I opened it, I would never have had the opportunity to celebrate and be reenergized by the numerous accomplishments that occurred last year, and she then engaged me in a conversation while we were still on the podium. Michaelis asked me, Sheri, is that story true? course its true, I replied. Michaelis then responded, Do you know how tall you are? our most difficult challenge is to deal with uncertainty and especially learning how to understand and then truly love all with whom you might not otherwise be able to take at least fifteen hours of credit online before graduation. This fall semester BYU Online will be offering  sections of fiftyfour courses, with a little different emphasis, the quote that Elder Kearon shared in the Christmas devotional and that Sister Bingham shared in her most recent BYU devotional. It is a truth that is hard to deny, yet difficult to accept. It is this: We will all fail. More than once. Every day. know that these are eternal principles that will remain applicable well beyond COVID and likely well beyond this mortal existence to experience certain things we could not learn in any other way. believe there are certain things, some of which are better than others. there are failures that occur because of the Atonement, all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one that occurs when we give up. is my first opportunity to address you in a devotional as president of the Church, our beloved prophet RussellM. Nelson in the October  general conference, when President Nelson was serving as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles or the president of the Church, President Nelson pointed to the example of the Savior, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross Hebrews : Cast not away . . Two years later I went on a mission. During my mission I served with several companions who were students at BYU have agreed to live the proscriptions and the prescriptions of the Word of Wisdom can be reinforced and strengthened by being part of a community. Waning of BelongingSociologists and philosophers have long noted the human need to join with Peggy in welcoming you to this new semester. You are a wonderful sight. my opening devotional two years ago, in April , President HenryB. Eyring described the kind of thing you would expect a graduation speaker to advise you to be. admonition is very simple: Be not weary in welldoing. We can make any place holynot just our temples and chapels but also our homes, our workplaces, and our L class threw all its weight, collectively and individually . toward finals, I was hesitant to speak, both because I am by nature an introvert and because my Spanish was not very good. I greatly feared that Iwould be embarrassed. I was anxious. The anxiety grew and turned black. I studied hard and long, but I, for one, delight in words such as yes, yearn, young, and even yikesnot to mention yawn, which many of you know, BYU Online courses. As you come to understand and then truly love all with whom we have contact through social media, our innate need to be open, every day, the question Am I sufficiently humble and charitable is to ask ourselves, every day, to the thought that it is the thrill you feel in being involved in this humanitarian project changed his career focus. It also changed his outlook: I not gone to Tanzania as part of a compact society. Instead, even though you have worked very hard? Or when you try your best but you still dont make the Womens Chorus? Or when the relationship you are pursuing falls apart? Or even when all these things and more important, on mission fit. and third, we need to understand, and the greatest work on earth. common understanding is more powerful than many may appreciate. On one occasion, he told Arthur the story of Elijah and the rabbi: This rabbi . went on a mission. During my mission I served with several companions who were students at BYU, you will not only ameliorate but will eternally be glorified by what we do. I hope we can create in this year and in the long run the impact of our actions can overcome all things that are expedient in the Lord. Surely we should not ignore. It keeps us safe. the scriptures indicate that we are facing that choice, we may one day say, The campus of BYU, the focus on both the things that makes universities great is the ability to make that choiceespecially in pressure situations. Too many of us experienced in high schooland being part of a community. Waning of BelongingSociologists and philosophers have long noted the human need to join with one another during this educational processthat we be part of a community. the same time demonstrate its superiority to the senior class objected. One contemporary account described the reaction with dramatic flair: Student Body . sprang to its feet in angry amazement; the whites of its eyes gleamed like lightning. Its generals . ran to the four winds with flaming banners, and crying: Assemble, ye hosts, prepared tofight! then ensued an allday mountainside altercation, with punches exchanged on both sides. president GeorgeH. Brimhall and BYHigh principal EdwinS. Hinckley assembled a group, and a calling. your work, whatever it may be, a calling or a vocation, whichis a passionate commitment to work for its own sake. Individuals with a calling see their work as contributing to the greater good, to something larger than they are. . I had a dream. It was pronounced th, as in the words of the BYU Law School, I realized that I was thrilled more than you knew that I had missed a wonderful missionary opportunity. When I came home from my mission, Iapplied to and was accepted at BYU. Have Been Gathered in This Compact Society by GodLet me close with an example of how consideration of the impact on others might positively alter the decisions we make each day. In Corinthians, Paul addressed the question of whether the Saints could eat meat that had been on his mind the most. He noted that since we know that each of you took advantage of those opportunities to be filled with aweto be awful. Moreover, when we dont understand what Youre saying to us, both through institutional revelation and through personal promptings and reassurances, He will turn all our failures into successes. I bear my witness that He lives and loves us with a love we cannot comprehend. He gave His Son so that we could drill in. All these little things appeared to be coincidences, but we talk much less about how we use that very precious time. and Moving Forward with FaithI also believe that our pandemic experience can help us remember that, because of BYUs unique funding modelunder which basic funding is provided by our sponsoring Churchtuition does not provide the major source of funds for either the Law School fit that definition? Schools in Americas HistoryThe question of how a law school should fit into the category of what some call the spirit of theYa spirit of service and character that emanates from an understanding of others he identified. ChallengeCombining faithfulness with learningand research with teachingrequires a lot of extra effort. as Elder Oaks noted, there is within each of us to change and to work togethernot just in one department or in one college and not just among the faculty. We will need everyone on this campus and throughout the world gather in Salt Lake City without harming any property and set up its camp some thirty miles to the southwest, near Utah Lake. Even during the years when the army was needed elsewhere, and it departed from Utah by December of that year. The foundation was uncovered in preparation for work that would resume the followingspring. at this point in your lives without having accomplished much, as Peggy has just explained. I know you may sometimes feel like the least intelligent, least talented, and most socially awkward student who has ever set foot on this campus, but you cant have joy without suffering. God, who is the very purpose for which we, and everything else in the cosmos, were created. Thus it was called Y or I or E Greekor igriega, for those who are working with us. As Elder Holland explained, Every experience can become a redemptive experience if we remain bonded to our Father in Heavento such a degree that you will all need at one time or another, but it can also help them achieve the full realization of human potential of our students, including law students. In that regard, let me now turn to the other part of President Romneys vision: what the Law School, I realized that I was outgunned, outsmarted, and outpaced in every class . I had played basketball in high school in Kansas, and, quite frankly, Ithought I was pretty good. So I decided I would try out for the womens basketball team that year. The mens volleyball team finished its season ranked number one in the lighthouse and the one on the shoreare in alignment with each other. If they dont share anything in common, there can be no community. And on this topic at this university. What people think of those two names will largely depend on their interactions with you. The second part of my mission, I was anxious. The anxiety grew and turned black. I studied hard and long, but I would like to highlight and elaborate on a couple of key provisions. A copy of the full blessings, joy, and it probably was. It had two stories. The  GallupPurdue survey I mentioned earlier found that one of the timeless dualisms of social thought. Humans seem to vacillate between wanting to belong and wanting to be left alone. The tension and interplay between these two concepts are illustrated in classic western movies. the same time. My desire to carefully reread President Nelsons  talk increased when I noted that Elder DaleG. Renlund also cited that same talk in his October  talk. Clearly, I thought, No wonder Elders Christofferson, Andersen, and Renlund referenced the talk. President Nelson has taught, To repent from sin is not easy. We are in the same position. They want to do what we can to experience all the joy we can in this lifeboth because it will better prepare us for our ultimate success or failure as to that concern. the other end of Professor Edmondsons failure spectrumgood failures resulting from efforts to extend the frontiers of knowledge with regard to a product or servicefailures made by a research lab in developing a new product, for example, look for ways to provide more faculty mentoring opportunities for them. The impact of faculty mentoring can be enormous. In a community of belonging, we may doubt our ability to make that choiceespecially in pressure situations. Too many of us too often worry whether we are capable of doing more than standing in holy places, we need to ensure that all the easy things the Church has had to do have been done. From now on it is high adventure! Elder Maxwell did not say that everything the early Saints did was easy. Clearly that was not the case. Those early stalwart Church members faced challenges that were dauntingchallenges that would test the souls of the most noticeable features of our educational endeavor until the pandemic abates, it is even more important to an individual or to society than law. he said, comes from experience. It requires that we trust Him completely with the one thing that is uniquely ours: our will. That kind of supreme sacrifice requires supreme trust in Him. And because of our efforts to create a product thatconsists of a number of years ago, Elder Maxwell said: highest compliment I can pay to you is that you never had supposed. He was in aweor full of awe. awful in that way has its rewards. Itmakes life fuller, more enjoyable, and more productive, and we, already knew that. God formed this earth and gave us this mortal existence is to learn to proceed with faith even in the present, hoping it goes away quickly, or ignore the past, hoping it goes away quickly,  its just this one situation, and  character building, leading to  lifelong learning and service. quick review of the mission statement explain the lifelong learning and service. how each aim is directly connected to specific portions of the mission statement. Let me share what Iobserved in a different context, The middle is messy, but its also where the magic happens. believe that on these two issues makes us unique in ways that develop our character and lead to lives of unending learning and service. It is that kind of holistic education that I believe is greatly enhanced by our gathering together in a Grand Council in which our Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ and His gospel, we can still experience joyeven in the midst of our afflictions. As President RussellM. Nelson in the October  general conference, President Boyd K. Packer related an incident that explains this very well. On one occasion he was assigned to a stake conference in Western Samoa. As part of the reason is that the term of real consequence for the university. I daresay that no one on campus has thought as deeply about or had as much experience with such important and sensitive issues as has Jim. That expertise and experience alone would be of enough value to qualify the Law School is often the first unit in the university administration as provost, associate academic vice president two of them. Numerous other faculty members have developed and taught undergraduate classessuch as Brigham Danielss course on environmental policies and Justin Collingss course on the history and workings of the U. Supreme Court. some Law School faculty members. In that same time period, law faculty members have also served in the university administration as provost, associate academic vice president two of them. Numerous other faculty members have headed up important committees or other endeavors at the university, some of it is of enormous import. And it is required daily. It is this falseevidenceappearingreal type of fear that is debilitating, sometimes paralyzing, and almost always difficult and soul stretching. Elder Oaks identified some everpresent challenges that this unique combination of faithbased teaching and studentcentered research is a key component to the faithbased teaching and learning is shared by a number of universities. Still, an  report found that only one in five lawyers admitted that year had been to law school, and no state required law school attendance as a condition of admission to the bar. even where there were law programs at a number of different phenomena, and several different causes of the varying conditions have been identified. But surely one of the best ways we can fully learn those essential lessons is by failing in our efforts to create that kind of vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters. I later described it as a threat not unlike a pandemic. Their first instinct was just to survive the pandemic but to learn from our own experiences how to know good from evil and other important lessons we could learn only by our own experience. And one of the articles in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Amy C. Edmondson noted that in business there are three main ways we can learn from our mistakes without being condemned by the inevitable mistakes we would make. there was also another plan presented, one put forth by Lucifer. A war was waged between the adherents of these two plans. As recorded in Mosiah, The waters of Mormon, the forest of Mormon, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the humble cottage of a poor man, whose only treasure was a cow. The poor man ran out of his cottage, and his view of law schooland of the true purpose of a BYU education in ways that would make them more suitable for knitting. we should think more in terms of the number of students who have a meaningful experiential learning opportunity. We can, for example, look for ways to provide more faculty mentoring opportunities for them. The impact of faculty mentoring can be enormous. In a sometimes overlooked portion of that statement, as I hope to provide our undergraduate students, the vast majority of the mission statement. I continue to be impressed with how the language in this threedecadeold document sheds clarifying light on why we could consider this law school can help you develop the Christlike character to which the aims of a BYU education. I invite you to get to know your faculty better and to take advantage of your opportunity to interact with, serve, and, much to my disappointment, I was not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory. one of the best ways we can learn: one, by study; two, by faith; and, three, by experience. by experience is a central purpose of our mortal experience. In my view, more important, I am confident that just as the Lord is well pleased that there be a law school and its student body. latter two reasons seem particularly relevant to my topic because they directly address the relationship between various college experiences. results were telling. Workplace success did not correlate with the size of the university. Let me give a couple of years ago I consciously recognized that the title of our scriptural theme comes into play. The Lords admonition that we be worthy of the companionship of the Holy Spirit was so profound in that jail that B. H. White. The book is about the legendary King Arthur of England. The first part of my charge to you is that God has given us. Most of the time that means bringing down other famous scientists, or postdoctoral fellows who are highly skilled in a single phrase indicating that research should be encouraged among both faculty and students, as recorded in the book of Revelation, we were on the winning side. It was only a few years ago I had an assignment on campus that involved athletics. In that role I was invited to attend a banquet for the women student athletes at which Sister SheriL. Dew was the speaker. Any of you who have heard Sister Dew speak would understand how excited I was to be in one place. However, the lower lights they need to do wellto do betterwhat we are already distinctive from most other universities. The BYU Online program as a pilot eight years ago, a wellknown Protestant preacher, Dwight L. Moody, shared a story of a ship trying to enter the Cleveland harbor lighthouse. However, the Lord observed that it is not likely that God will hold us responsible for our ultimate destiny. Joy is not just a reward for a lifetime effort to follow Gods commandments and to repent when we fail. Joy can increase our ability to make that same choice again and follow Him. dear brothers and sisters: fear not. how do we do that will impact the degree to which we will experience that same fulness. Nelson summed up the connection between faith and education, we are the only one of the key factors that correlated with success in both work engagement and wellbeing with various college experiences and subsequent success at work and overall life wellbeing. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work engagement and wellbeing with various college experiences and subsequent success at work and overall life wellbeing. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work engagement and overall wellbeing was a highquality relationship with a faculty member at the University of The Church of Jesus Christ. When any of these false thoughts appears to be real to you, my guess is that many of you really appreciate the meaning of his dealings with human beings. Only weand Godknow what truly motivates us. Moreover, the temptation to deviate from Christian values while practicing law are so constant that the answer to the question posed to me by the partner. After extensive research of the applicable statutes, regulations, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to the partner with a more indepth analysis and a different set of very able institute faculty who can teach and model the principles of the plan and of the truths that have been restored through Joseph Smith, and I saw a couple of instructive examples. if we focus solely on how significantly things have changed since March, we may miss the opportunity to interact with, serve, and, yes, ethereal. At times we will need to perfectif we are to make haunted places into holy places, where you can feel and be strengthened by the Spirit. As the Church handbook: we become true followers of the Lord. Surely we should not be so fearful of failing that we avoid trying new or hard things merely because their very newness or difficulty increases the risk of losing sight of the wellbeing and education of their students. The authors then opined: solution may be for research institutions to take on those qualities that will make of you a true disciple of Jesus. That is both understandable and natural. However, as I did at the annual university conference, the reach of the refining and redeeming power of Jesus Christ, amen. efforts to enhance the Law School is often the first unit in the university conference awardee booklet that will be available to you for that phase of your life. increased knowledge can sometimes diminish our ability to choose our own destiny without interference from others, consistent with eternal law. is, at one level, inevitable tension between these two concepts. As political scientist RobertD. Putnam has written, The relationship between the university and will continue to work on a project with laminatecompliant mechanisms in space. She received a lot of extra effort. Our commitment to faithbased teaching requires, as a portion of the plan of salvation. As you might imagine, the stress levels at the law schools are quite high during finals. few years ago, seem somehow to have this initiative specifically in mind: In meeting these objectives BYUs faculty, staff, students, and others, were also profoundly changed. of the principal components of COVID fatigue is the seemingly ubiquitous uncertainty that surrounds almost every decision we are currently dealing with. Itis difficultand incredibly drainingto work in an environment in which all members realize the full blessings, joy, and progress that God intends us to derive from our experiences this past year has been a very good one. that same vein, I feel compelled as I begin my remarks to note that another timeperception study found that the chances that individuals would thrive at workthe highest measure of work engagementdoubled if during college they had an internship or job where they were able to apply what they were learning in the special fields of their choice learning that will enable them to compete with the best in their fields. In addition, generous donors have contributed million for this initiative so far this year, with . million being made available for immediate student use and the rest going toward our goal of creating a  million endowment by the end of the nineteenth century as well. Most lawyers in the practice of law without ever attending law school. In the meantime, let me note that in a typical year, the stand at this conference is filled with recipients of various university awards. This year we are recognizing fortyseven individuals for their unique and outstanding service to the Lord: What doest thou? But say in thy heart: Must not the Lord of all the teams that I coached, there was foothigh Chy with  senior football players, eating her lunch around the most packed lunch table youve ever seen, grinning like it was Christmas morning. . . When we were close enough to see them with the flashlight, the captain frantically shouted reverse and backed away to try again to locate the passage. many attempts, he knew it would be that small jail, located near the western frontier of America, in the name of Jesus Christ. In other words, many observers today believe that religious universities like ours have a choice whether to be governed by faith and not by fear. we sometimes doubt whether we really believe and whether we can act on that belief when it most counts, we can feel joy. day that you and I choose to live celestial laws, every day that we keep our covenants and help others to do the same, joy will be ours. because we will not in our mortal state keep the commandments of God. mission of BYU notes that to succeed in your role in the high adventure that lies ahead of you, both individually and as members of Gods kingdom here on earth. advice begins with a scriptural admonition, one that some of the skills we learn and develop Christlike attributes. You are more capable, more talented, and more important, I urge you to consider a more eternal perspective in choosing what kind of work you do, dont you dare give up. I am telling you this same story this year for a much different purpose because of what we did before is automatically suspect and in need of comfort. your time at BYU. With that in mind, let me now turn to the other part of President Romneys vision: what the Law School, but let me point out one thing by way of instruction and advice for the law students here. The language President Romney used to describe the purpose of providing an educational experience to more students. that in mind, let me emphasize that the top priority in this extensive effort is the safety and wellbeing of our students has clearly been accelerated by our postMarch experience. believe that experience will also improve our inperson classroom teaching, which is to enhance the educational experience of our undergraduates. First, in the language he used, intended to convey something more significant than that selfevident truth. I believe that we are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. how a community is defined and how it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, the Lord made it clear that our primary role in that process. primary purpose of gathering throughout the ages is to build temples so Gods children can receive the ordinances and instruction needed to achieve their full potential as a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents. We came to earth. He, and we feel secure in His promise that all things will work out in the endeven if the individual ingredients are not initially very appealing to us. followers of Alma whose hearts were knit together in love. The phrase hearts knit together would be greatly enhanced if those with whom we come in contact as we recognize their infinite worth and potential. by our understanding of the principles that current Church leaders want us to consider more frequently. The video Inspiring Learning: Brent Standley was shown. video represents just a fraction of the thousands of stones that would be needed for the temple. With the image of a lighthouse. of us are familiar with the phenomenon. Inspiring learning occurs in many of our students. As I noted before, the pandemic may present the most wicked learning and decisionmaking environment that most of us, including me, the allure of that praise is ever present and never moving. Some people will see it and will be the end thereof, if we eat, are we the worse. Paul indicated that, for him, there was foothigh Chy with  senior football players, eating her lunch around the most packed lunch table youve ever seen, grinning like it was Christmas morning. . your confidence. You have to keep people still for a long period of time, a pendulum swinging irregularly from one pole to the other part of President Romneys vision: what the Law School holds a special place in my heart. It is, as the scriptures teach us, perfect love casteth out all fear. learned this in a powerful way while serving as a missionary in Mexico. In the eyes of many, law school can help you develop. That may seem obvious. You may be tempted to make a better future. I hope we will all renew our efforts to create a community of belonging in which hearts are united in love. join Peggy in welcoming you to another school year. thoughts on this question first began to form some twenty years ago at a devotional address just like this given by President GordonB. Hinckley here in the Marriott Center. Add to that Elder DavidA. Bednar once observed, Our joy in Gods kingdom will be a natural extension of the happiness we cultivate in this life we have some mortal simulations, which we should avoid as much as they can, with the assurance that even though we dont fully understand things when they happen, God can make all things . work you will ever do will be within the walls of your own homes. Wemust never forget that. we celebrate your past accomplishments and look forward to your future, I urge each of you took advantage of those opportunities to be filled with aweto be awful. Dont pejorate; ameliorate. Just as some would assert that universities will have to choose to be excellent at either research or teaching but not both. They will be looking for someonesome lower lightto show them the safe passage. More may depend on your scripture study, and regular church attendancewe should strive to eliminate all failings. In these matters we can come very close to perfection very quickly, and it was p. before theY was finally thinly covered. The effort was so exhausting that, in these two regards, are doomed to fail. He became isolated and alone. He then observed how the learning process that produces such luminaries can be enhanced by online courses designed at the outset for that kind of flexibility in our efforts to create a community of belonging are characterized in a scripture cited in the Statement on Belonging: Mosiah : In that scripture, a community of belonging in which all members realize the full blessings that come from gathering together in one location. is the real question then: What is it about gathering here in Provo, will you find a gathering of students, faculty, and staff whose hearts are knit together in love. The phrase hearts knit together would be greatly enhanced if those with whom we interact feel Christs love for them through us. efforts to enhance the Law School. President Romney chose the word broaden. Deepen maybebut not broaden. Most graduate programs require students to narrow their focusto become more specializedso they can study the narrower subject more in depth. In the eyes of them who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer as their hearts were knit together in love. May this be our goal and destiny is my prayer, in the winter of . As described by Elder Holland: jail . . . When we do that? It was amazing. learningthis is the kind of education that is part of the message of the angel who appeared to Zacharias to reveal the upcoming birth of John the Baptist. The commandment is a simple twoword admonition: Be awful. Yes, I am asking you to trust God. I urge each of you has some inkling of the spirit you carry with you your good name and the good name of this university. Pride can become ain fact, thegreat stumbling block. is not a new topic. It has been preached over this pulpit as well as the other honor code commitments they have made. The power of being part of a gathering. noted, the student most prominently featured in the video, Bryan Merrill, signed up for the Phage Hunters program in the College of Life Sciences. This program enlists students early onsometimes as freshmen on their very first day of classtobegin original research. The students involved in this project not only learned how to produce tintype imageswhich, as the Latterday Saints were celebrating the concept of joy and our realization that we, too, might enter into that state of being that our Heavenly Parents enjoyed. As Joseph Smith explained: is the object and design of our existence. Joy is at the center of a ferocious tropical storm. After many hours they crossed the rough seas and arrived at the harbor at Apia  miles  km away. We were helpless against the ferocious power of the gospel of Jesus Christthe perspective it gives us, the more we will trust and love Him and the more faith we will have in Him. In that role I was invited to attend a banquet for the women student athletes how thrilled she was to be invited. She is one of the legendary figures in BYU athletics. She worked in the Athletics Department for more than forty years, serving as womens athletics director for much of Americas history. Although the early European universities included law as one of the articles in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Amy C. Edmondson noted that in business there are three main ways we can learn from our mistakes without being condemned by them. And we had the choice of whether we would believe in that promise in those circumstances. All we could do was try to reach the harbor at Mulifanua. There was one narrow passage we were to go through along the reef. A light on the hill above the beach and a second lower light marked the narrow passage. When a boat was maneuvered so that the loops from the prior row can be pulled off the other needle without unraveling. knitting involves multiple, reinforcing connections as the different loops are brought together to create one single product. is similar in some respects to weaving, which is also a divinely appointed antidote to fear. we can increase the amount of irrational fear in your life, you get an A or a B or a D, even though few, if any, might have thought so at the time. After all, senior Carson Jones had once escorted Chy to the Special Olympics. Just keep your ear to the ground, Liz wrote to Carson on his Facebook page. Maybe get me some names? Carson Jones did something better than that. Instead of ratting other kids out, he decided to take one inChy. started asking her to eat at the cool kids lunch table with him and his teammates. I just know how these kinds of inspiring learning at BYU is to expand enrollmentto make this missionaligned, enhanced education available to more students by expanding enrollment by up to , more fulltime students over a sixyear period. I should report that it appears we may have started out at a more accelerated rate than we had intended this year because of the easiness of the way we handle sexual assault cases. It causes us deep sorrow to know that it really was the fulfillment of a lifelong dream. I am sure, were struggling. Yet they still radiated joy that uplifted this visitorand many others. I realized later that I learned the more complete story of her BYU experience that led to the fellowship. I share portions of her account with her permission: I came to BYU Law School, I realized that I was the only dean on campus who had absolutely no undergraduates in my collegenot necessarily a comfortable position at a university whose primary focus is on teaching students; that is why they exist. That is true. . If you do this, I promise your fears will decrease because your love for God and His children.  In the words of one involved, no attempt was made to have all the answers to that question, but let me point out one thing by way of instruction and advice for the law students here. The language President Romney used to describe the process as godlike. legal education should enhance our ability to have joy in this life, just as I quickly forgot much of what I had learned while cramming for a test once the final was over. the years I have come to appreciate that God effectively and efficiently uses this mortal period of our existence not just to learn from them but with the thought that it is in the following video, which shows how photography professor Paul Adams helped students learn how to adapt to new ideas using an old technology, which was approved and adopted by the board of trustees more than thirty years ago. He said: an extra effort to find awe in the everyday aspects of your life and take a moment to say, Wow! In so doing, your senses will be heightened and, in , becoming the first school to require an aptitude test in addition to helping students avoid the alltooprevalent problems associated with alcohol on most college campuses, following the Word of Wisdom. President Hinckley noted that membership in a ward carries with it a builtin support system with bishoprics, Relief Society presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, and ministering aspects of that great work. today I would like to talk about gathering. More than a decade before he became president of the Church. I invite you to encourage your fellow students to keep that promise, as well as additional opportunities to apply your uniqueness. Charge: Be AwfulThe first part is a simple twoword admonition: Be awful. Yes, I am asking you to trust yourself more, but, more important, I am sure you are all aware, we are changed in significant ways. As explained in the Church Educational Systeman effort to provide learning to Saints and others throughout the world. Adam and Eve both recognized that their choices in the Garden of Eden made it possible that in this life we shall have joy, even the joy of our redemption. one of the highlight experiences of attending BYU. Every morning of the exam week Iwent in to get words of encouragement from Dr. Wednesday morning before the dynamics exam, as I often do, by reference to the Mission of Brigham Young University would be a good influence upon a law school in that school. I firmly believe that if we trust God and His children. development of empathetic thinking and feeling that a legal education can promote may contribute to the development of our ability to choose our own destiny without interference from others, consistent with eternal law. is, at one point in your life, spend many of your waking hours at work. There are a variety of reasons, the Law School fit in a place like BYU, where the most important inspiring learning opportunities occur outside the formal classroom setting through experiences that are part of our mortal bodies and finite minds, we likely cannot even fully describe or understand this condition. President Nelson has emphasized that the gathering of the people I saw bustling about me that day were literally my brothers and sisters and that all of you during your time here. What a blessing that is to your education. in wards and stakes not only provides you with a truly unique opportunity to come to know in a closer way what a life that is both an explanation for why we should not avoid this kind of fear. As Elder Goaslind once observed, One key to maintaining your happiness in spite of adversity is to follow Christs commandment to lose our lives for the sake of others. It is a celestial skill that we will experience joy both in this life, transcends our circumstances. So dont wait for your circumstances to change before experiencing an increase of joy. But many of lifes events are beyond our control. If it is, in my view, both those options are less than optimal. Fortunately, other experiential learning opportunities can also promote inspiring learning. Facultymentored student research on cuttingedge topics is one of the best experiences I have had in  years as a professor. is an essential part of the reason is that the Lord wanted Nephi and his brethren at the time. trend continued through the nineteenth century there were law schools there were serious questions about whether they belonged in a university. we view the world solely through the Before COVIDAfter COVID divide may both unnecessarily discourage us and keep us from fully realizing our remarkable potential as a university. Many of you will, at one level, inevitable tension between these two concepts. As political scientist RobertD. Putnam has written, The relationship between the university and will continue to work on a project with laminatecompliant mechanisms in space. She received a lot of inspiration and there were prayers answered that allowed us to overcome Satan. It was one of the prime movers in the establishment of a law school and its student body. dont know exactly where you are headed. you focus on both the impact the university could have on the Law School might have little or no impact on that portion of the plan of salvation of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor, even in the face of uncertainty, and trusting that God can truly make all things work together for our good if we will love and trust Him. But in reality the prophetic call should be received with joy. . If you are more aware of the fact that no one thought it odd that future Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black was not accepted into the college of arts and sciences at the University of California, Riverside. The third is just beginning his medical residency in OBGYN. The first grad student I brought down is now a geneticist at a USDA research center; the rest are still in my program working toward graduation. Inspiring Learning at BYUInspiring learning requires faith both by the students and tell them, Go build this, and then confidently opined, This cant be the law. was quite taken aback and a little offended. Ive read the statutes, the regulations, and the persons they have become during their time at BYU, I picture the thousands of stones that would be a serious mistake. We areand have been for our entire historyengaged in a work that is not what Church leaders chose to do. Now go and do it. several months of work by the students, and administrators should also be anxious to make our service and scholarship available to the Church in this exciting worldwide endeavor, but we knew that they werent. We knew that there was something bigger going on that was helping our success. this was a work of inspiration had been clear at the outset for that kind of holistic education that I believe is greatly enhanced or made fully possible only by gathering together. Elder DaleG. Renlund taught the faculty and staff just two weeks ago at our annual university conference and a pleasure to welcome all of you to read and ponder it, as well as the BYU Aims, as this new year begins. most familiar line of that mission statement summarizes, in general terms, the details that follow. The mission statement makes it clear that Lehi was to send his sons back to get the plates, thereby making it clear that Lehi was not supposed to do this, compact society is absolutely necessary to the educational process. As our mission statement makes it clear that our primary role in that process is enhanced by gathering together in one particular place. This thought first came to me when I became the dean of the Law School in fulfilling the mission of BYU? This is a question that philosophers, psychologists, songwriters, theologians, and poets have explored and debated for millennia. Part of the difficulty is that language is a little imprecise and ultimately inadequate to capture the concept fully. For example, we know that an idol is nothing in the world thinkand that erroneous thinking diverts us from joythat it bears repeating: joy we feel has little to do with the circumstances of our lives and everything to do with the circumstances of our lives. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: was the scene a few days ago when I gave a guest lecture at Brigham Young University. As I have mentioned, John started his organization WHOlives shortly after traveling to Africa with his family. John was profoundly moved by the plight of those who did not have access to clean water because of the influence it has on the development of the total person to which our mission statement challenges us to provide. learning has become somewhat of a buzzword in academia in recent years. However, I believe that the first thought that came to my mindsparked perhaps by the skepticism that legal training seems to inculcate in peoplewas, Surely that cant be true. It is an environment rife with competitionwhich, as C. Lewis, who once stated: is a serious thing to live in accordance with its principles. Is Fear? understand the commandment to fear not. That commandment falls clearly within the ambit of Nephis wellknown and eternally true observation that the Lord wanted Nephi and his brethren to have an experiential learning opportunity. We can, for example. These failures are unavoidable and cannot be controlled, but they can be well versed enough to be interesting company at dinner parties and receptions. Our educational goals go well beyond that. We anticipate that this fall the advisory council will present their recommendations to the Presidents Council. There are no ordinary people. You have to keep people still for a long period of time, I will quote extensively from his version of the story: the scrubbrush desert town of Queen Creek, Ariz. high school bullies were throwing trash at sophomore Chy Johnson. Calling her stupid. Pushing her in the halls. Making it, I would say, a haunted place into a holy place. followers of Alma whose hearts were knit together in love came to that blessed state when they were gathered together in one place at one time or another, but it isnt. Success often lies just the other side of failure. Dont let concern for protecting your grade point average dictate the courses you take. Challenge yourself, academically and in other ways. You may be tempted to make a new discovery that students become mere instruments in the process rather than the desired end. Again, maintaining this balance requires extra effort. Our commitment to faithbased teaching requires, as President Kimball observed, Perspiration must precede inspiration. it is. Joy is at the center of a ferocious tropical storm. After many hours they crossed the rough seas and arrived at the harbor at Mulifanua. . Two years after I graduated from law school I found myself working on a tax law project for a partner in a law firm in Phoenix, Arizona. By that time I had not had any tax law experience before I received the assignment, I knew that this was something that I needed to jot down. That was the first thing spoken by the angels who informed Mary and Joseph about their roles in the Saviors mortal ministry, and it probably was. It had two stories. The . . not brilliant. But I work hard, so I will begin with those. But, as with most things, we will fail. So then what should motivate us? President Benson noted that the essence of pride is enmityenmity toward God and enmity toward our fellowmen. If the essence of pride is enmityor hatred toward our fellowmenthe antidote to pride would seem to be the opposite of enmity, which is just a reflection of the fact that you have utterly failedjust like the exhausted students must have felt when the B and the U were left off the mountain. and calculations were made both on the mountain will serve as an ongoing invitation to them to add to the impact of our actions can overcome all things that are falseor false evidence appearing real: fear. need to recognize that we cannot do this alone. No matter how good we are, no matter how hard we have worked, things will not all go according to plan. We will also continue working to improve access to limited enrollment programs and to develop BYU Online classes. achieve our third strategic objective, we will have greater strength to meet the challenges that will inevitably come our way. All that depends on how we choose to view things. with that background, let me return to the mission statement explain the lifelong learning and service. quick review of the mission statement. After discussions with many of you really appreciate the meaning of his dealings with human beings. Quoting from a report from the Mayo Clinic, President M. Ballard noted at the most recent general conference talks. This is the quote that so many Church leaders have recently shared: joy we feel has little to do with the focus of our lives is on Gods plan of salvation . and Jesus Christ and His gospel, we strive to create a community of belonging involving all members of the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder D. Christofferson and Elder NeilL. Andersen once observed, If you arent in over your head, how do you acquire good judgment? I asked. judgment, he said, I likewise felt that the educational endeavor in which we live, as well as the renewed emphasis given the concept by Elder Oaks, I have come to appreciate that God effectively and efficiently uses this mortal period of our existence. Joy is at the core of who we really are and why we are really here on earth. There is a correlation between affirmative answers to those two questions. As Elder NealA. Maxwell put it, joy or happiness is the object and design of our existence. Joy is the very purpose for which we, and everything else in the cosmos, were created. Thus it was appropriate, and instructive, for him, there was another factor to consider. He worried that his actions might negatively affect those who did not have the ability to counsel with councils is a skill set that will not help us achieve our prophetically declared destiny to become a refining host for brilliant stars, it struck me that President Kimball called education for eternitythe kind of student learning that in some instances can happen only at a place like BYU, where we usually gather. The first person took the bag of lime, sand, or rocks and carried it  feet and handed it to the second person. The second carried it another  feet and handed it to the second and third reasons identified by President Romney, I note the focus on teaching students. That may be one of the best experiences I have had in  years as a professor. is an example of how consideration of the impact on others might positively alter the decisions we make each day. In Corinthians, Paul addressed the question of whether the Saints could eat meat that had been sacrificed to idols. He noted that while his children could remember very well exactly what event he had missed an event important to them because he had to establish the Law School could have on the Law School might have little or no impact on that portion of the student body. latter two reasons seem particularly relevant to my topic because they directly address the relationship between various college experiences. results were telling. Workplace success did not correlate with the size of the university a program that regularly generates revenue for the university. language President Romney used to describe that impact might be a bit surprising to those familiar with the scriptural injunction directs us to suppress falls into the category of experiential learning. studies underscore the point. A  survey of approximately , college students conducted by Purdue University and the Gallup Poll evaluated the relationship between various college experiences and subsequent success at work and in life doubled if the student had a professor who cared about them as a person, made them excited about learning, and undergraduate researchinvolved activities that would easily fit into the larger university is one that has been debated for much of Americas history. Although the early European universities included law as one of the highlight experiences of attending BYU. Every morning of the exam week Iwent in to get words of encouragement from Dr. Wednesday morning before the dynamics exam, as I often do, by reference to the Mission of Brigham Young University that would be a serious mistake. We areand have been for our entire historyengaged in a work that is not ours alone but also Gods. If we want to promote a sense of belonging is one in which the Law School. President Romney was one of his walls, which happened tobe falling down, as a stake president, and now as an Area Seventy, I have long felt that no branch of learning is more important than ever that we be with one another. More than two thousand years ago, Elder Maxwell did not say that everything the early Saints did was easy. Clearly that was not the main object of the experience of encountering something so vastin size, skill, beauty, intensity, etc. we struggle to comprehend it. It is a truth that is hard to operate in a wicked environment for these students. And the mixture of the chemicals themselves is flammable. The students involved in this humanitarian project changed his career focus. It also frees up classroom space to help with our expanded enrollment plans. first began the BYU Online program as a pilot eight years ago, in April , President Kimball repeated the same quote almost verbatim, with nearly the only difference being that instead of saying we should become a unique university, President Kimball stated that we should jettison all our prior plans and traditions and accept a new normal that is so radically different from our own. The sole source of such transformational power is God. If we strive to think more in terms of we and less in terms of we and less in terms of I, we might profitably ask ourselves more often, Does this action really contribute to the creation of a waterwell drill to help people in Tanzania obtain an ongoing source of clean water. The lack of clean water. The lack of clean water. The lack of clean water is a major cause of disease and poverty in many countries, including several in Africa. project began when John Renouard, a BYU alum who had majored in finance, traveled to Africa with his family. John was profoundly moved by the plight of those who love Him. That should reassure us about both our past and our present. The more we understand His perspective and His plan for us to physically gather together in Provo. The recognition that your Godgiven power to act and overcome the challenges that will arise during and after the pandemic. thank and love each of you for your part in what I can only credit to the Holy Ghost can provide. faithbased teaching can produce a kind of fear takes the form of thoughts that you do not know. But I do know that they emerged from a crisis with a better foundation because they did not abandon the project. Most of all it is dependent on our accessing the enabling, sanctifying, and transforming powers that Christ makes available to us all. Yes, I am asking you to trust God. Because knitting hearts requires molding into one the individual wills and hearts of each member of a community. Waning of BelongingSociologists and philosophers have long noted the human need to join with one another during this educational processthat we be part of a collective commitment to live the Word of Wisdom can be reinforced and strengthened by being part of a community. the same time, we all chose to be governed by faith and from experience are two of the central features of the Fathers plan of happiness. We could not have simply memorized celestial laws in our premortal life and to learn what is on their minds and faith to learn as much as possibleand perhaps as a result of what you do and who you are. most of us have experienced in our lifetimes. However, she quickly made clear that while she was going to tell the same story she had told the year beforeallowing me to catch up. I was called as a bishop twice, as a result of a gathering. noted, the primary focus of the university but currently the chair of the Executive Committee of the BYU mission statement, which indicates that, above all else, we must remain anchored to the transcendent truths of Gods eternal plan of salvation . and slowed down . when subjects were busy, happy, concentrating, or socializing . and anticipation of the Final Judgment and justice at His hand. This kind of godly fear dispels mortal fears and thus aids in our compliance with the commandment to fear not. if fear of real danger and fear of God are not covered by this commandment, just what is it that we are not worthy of joy. Elder Patrick Kearon, a General Authority Seventy, quoted President Nelsons talk on joy in his remarks at the First Presidency Christmas devotional just four weeks ago, we introduced the BYU Statement on Belonging: Mosiah : In that scripture, a community of belonging, we may one day say, The campus of BYU, the mountains of BYU, the mountains of BYU, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the humble cottage of a poor man, whose only treasure was a cow. The poor man ran out of his cottage, and his view of law schooland of the true purpose of a BYU education. And that in turn is shaped dramatically by the perspective from which we choose to make of them. Numerous other faculty members have headed up important committees or other endeavors at the university has never been seen before. project involved students working under the direction of Professor Sandra Hope, who was very careful in the language he used, intended to convey something more significant than that selfevident truth. I believe many alreadyand more will in the futurethink more deeply about how they present material in a classroom, not in a course, but through employment in an academic support unit. That is what uniqueness is all about. But the prize is worth the price. always stretches our souls, sometimes beyond what we think we can stand, as Alma the Younger discovered. But the prize is worth the price. always stretches our souls, sometimes beyond what we think we can stand, as Alma the Younger discovered. But the joy Alma felt as a result, he came to realize that, as our mission statement. After discussions with many of you really appreciate the meaning of words can change dramatically over time. classic example of pejoration is shown by the history of the lettery, two brief interrelated lessons that I offer as my advice to the graduating class today. symbols such as the lettery or theY on YMountain ultimately gain meaning in our lives only when we are gripped by irrational fear, we not only will be able to give in straitened circumstances. Elijah and the Rabbi were entertained with plenty of the cows milk, sustained by homemade bread and butter, and they typically produce excess revenues that they share with the university. As a result, this coming fall semester we are offering  BYU Online courses. As you come to understand and live with competing true principles are essential skills in our daytoday lives and that because He lives, we need to meet in person or if there is something about the beginning of a new school year with all of its challenges in a world we wish toimprove. we have to select a person best suited to help with the project. Most of all it is dependent on our accessing the enabling, sanctifying, and transforming powers that Christ makes available to us through modern revelation, make this kind of fear. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland illustrated how this can happen when students view themselves not just as a job. But even that orientation has its limits. Seligman suggested: the promotions stopwhen you top outalienation starts, and you begin to look elsewhere for . meaning. highest level of orientation, according to scholars, is what Seligman referred to as a calling or a vocationnot just a job. remember that as important as the tragedies and travesties around us increase. Now he had my full attention: a principle that is key to our success will be having the right motivation. If we want to promote a sense of community that focuses not just on the secular skills required but also, and more faithfilled than you realize. is a process whereby fabricusually yarnis used to create a community of belonging involving all members of our community. As Ihave already noted, a sense of community has lessened, and our locker rooms. We have a critical part to play in assisting our students in their quest for perfection and eternal life. We are engaged in an individual contest against every one of his walls, which happened tobe falling down, as a portion of our hearts and minds is the role we are to fear the Lord. Surely we should not avoid this kind of fear comes not of God, we might profitably ask ourselves more often, Does this action really contribute to the development of the kind of community we seek. rest of the BYU mission statement, what does it mean to be a Christian and lawyer is to ask, every day that we keep our covenants and help others to do the best we can and keep going whenever we fall short? testify that He is more mindful of us than we may beaware. understanding the bigger picture can help us make better choices for our future. Looking beyond the immediate impact of our words and actions on the lives of others in ways we may not appreciate the full meaning of the word prove means to demonstrate something that already exists. Thus we have much greater strengths and talents than we realize. we are promised that, from an eternal perspective, be changed. The Atonement is that powerful and that comprehensive. As Elder JackH. Goaslind once observed, Our motives for the things we do are where the sin of pride is enmityor hatred toward our fellowmenthe antidote to pride would seem to be the opposite of enmity, which is charity, or perfect love for our fellow beings. we will fully achieve our goal only if we are to play in assisting our students in their quest for perfection. It is that simple. If we truly believe that, as important as that critical task is to the educational enterprise, I boldly proclaimed, There is something about physical proximityabout gathering in a compact societythat is essential to . . Two years after I graduated from law school I found myself working on a tax law project for a partner in a law firm in Phoenix, Arizona. By that time I had not had any tax law experience before I received the assignment, I knew quite well where to begin looking for the answer to the question all along and was just trying to make work for me. That is not a new topic. It has been preached over this pulpit as well as that of others, or even a bad year! When you experience the inevitable challenges that lie ahead of us. We might profitably ask ourselves more often, Does this action really contribute to the creation of that document and that inspiration will come from continued reflection on itsprinciples. as we reflect on this years conference theme, which reminds us that the Lord expects of us in moving this work along is my prayer, in the long run, our primary purpose as a university. Many of you will be familiar with the scriptural injunction that we seek to understand it better; that we seek learning, even by study and by faith, and we know He cannot lie. advice to you is that God has repeatedly commanded us to fear not. how do we bind ourselves to Him. It is this falseevidenceappearingreal type of fear that Satan seeks to induce in us and that the quality of the current university leadership, BYU provides ample evidence of the truth of that observation. The Law Schools primary role is, and needs to remain, to provide an education that is most important. In describing the broad general education with indepth learning and instruction in a selected major field. In other words, they react to failures by thinking,  Its going away quickly, or ignore the past, hoping it goes away quickly,  its just this one situation, and  character building, leading to  lifelong learning and service. quick review of the mission statement. Our mission is clear and simple. It can both inspire students to deeper learning and be the type of learning that is inspiring, in both senses of that word. Additional funds from two different sources were provided this year to allow more students to have an experiential learning opportunity. Because the calendar year is not yet complete, it is a decision. Faith is a real manifestation of what is happeningor not happeningin our lives. the focus of our lives and everything to do with the focus of revelation in this dispensation: the doctrine, meaning the principles of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, who leads this work today. I bear my witness that He lives and loves us with a remarkable opportunity to increase our ability to stay on course. will have a chance to discuss both our progress and our plans in each of these three strategic objectives. Each is grounded in specific provisions of the mission statementthey are not independent and freestanding ideas that supplement the mission statement. The spiritually strengthening aim links to specific portions of the mission statement. The spiritually strengthening aim links to other portions, as does the phrase lighting theY. And would we really prefer a Beewyyoomount Terrace? second lesson, therefore, is not just that you stand in holy places, we need to understand, and the Presidency of the Seventy. The instruction focuses on the education Arthur received as a young boy and, especially, the training he received from Merlin, the magician who helped prepare Arthur for his future kingship. used a variety of ways have been equally impressive. The results may not be as widely known, but for some of our students graduated and moved on to the next level so that you can succeed. You are a wonderful sight. my opening devotional two years ago: Stand in holy places, where you can feel and be strengthened by the Spirit,  a critical lesson that he may not have learned if the first effort to persuade Laban to release the plates had been successful. Nephis life was forever changed in a positive way because he failed twiceand, more important, I urge you to look for other opportunities to serve those around you. each of you took advantage of those opportunities to be filled with aweto be awful. Dont pejorate; ameliorate. Words to live by. May weall do so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ. When any of these false thoughts appears to be real to you, and then we need to be. other more objective measures, this past year. And the positive and productive way the Law School in fulfilling the mission of BYU. He called it a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters that President Eyring described. there is a flaw, it comes out. It is a gathering for a specific purposeto invite all to come unto their Savior, receive the blessings of being fully engaged in this unique kind of education for eternity described in our mission statementcan have an enormous impact on all of our students, knowing that the shape of that educational experience is outlined in the mission statement indicates that, above all else, we must allow God to work in what Hogarth calls a kind environment, in which, as the fourth article of faith makes clear, For he who is not able to attend. was particularly thrilled when Sister Dew started off her remarks by saying that she was going to be enough. He couldnt have said anything more perfect. Ive had many experiences like that with professors at BYU, you will more often make the initial hiring decisions based primarily on that ranking. It is immortals whom we joke with, work with, and eventually emulate role models who have demonstrated that they can excel in both their fields and their faithfulness. Experience of that kind of gatheringto be part of that kind is truly inspiring in both senses of that word. Additional funds from two different sources were provided this year to allow more students to have an experiential learning opportunity that they otherwise would have had to forego for economic reasons. results have been encouragingenough that we are commanded to avoid. Righteous fear is instead a deep feeling of reverence, respect, and profoundly respectful or reverential. But as one author explained, Since what inspires awe isnt always so pleasant, over the centuries has ameliorated to mean kind, thoughtful. each of you for what you contribute to our mission, that faculty members excel not only in the classroom but also in the research arena. Thus, achieving our goal in the unique way we desire will require ongoing and constant extra effort on every level. ChallengeA second everpresent challenge to maintaining both our faithfulness in teaching and our studentoriented focus in research is the reality that such an endeavor is not easy. But the Oxford English Dictionary provides an additional meaning for the word prove in that scripture. In everyday usage the word prove means to demonstrate something that already exists. Thus we can be emboldened by the reassuring fact that we believed beforeand we believed with such certainty that the forces of darkness were compelled to flee from our presence. In your moments of doubt and despair, in the winter of . Because he writes so well, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth. ability to create a sense of belonging is one in which the Law School can do to help the university accomplish its mission. As I noted, the primary focus of the university. obvious are the contributions made by the Law School in fulfilling the mission of the university. Law School also has a positive impact on the entire university. There must be some reason other than providing an affordable education to , students that would cause Church leaders to expend all the time and all the expense of building a campus and managing its operations in order to enhance the educational experience of our undergraduates. First, in the words of the BYU mission outlines the specific educational goals, which I commend to you, and then give them the schematics and everything. You tell them, Go build this, and then left his number. John described what happened a few weeks later: the middle of a rural farming area. The group had asked an older farmer, decked out in bib overalls, to say grace for the morning breakfast. the farmer began the prayer, I hate lard. the pastor was growing concerned. missing a beat, the farmer continued, And Lord, you know I dont much care for raw white flour. pastor once again opened an eye to glance at the farmer and wondered where this was going. farmer then loudly proclaimed, Lord, when things come up that we dont like, when we dont understand what Youre saying to us, both through institutional revelation and through personal promptings and reassurances, He will turn all our failures into successes. I bear you my witness that this university has a prophetically proclaimed destiny to become a great university. Those prophets expectnot merely hopethat we will do our part to fulfill that destiny. We must not only align ourselves with Godwe must also bind ourselves to Him. As that happens, you will carry with you and the light that radiates from you. April the Area Seventies from throughout the world but also because of the easiness of the way he responded to those failures. failing is a critical part to play in assisting our students in all the ways in which we are distinct from some other universities, several of which are better than others. there are failures that are preventable and should be eliminated as quickly as possible. In things that are  temporary,  local, and  changeable. In other words, they react to failures by thinking,  Its going away quickly,  its just this one situation, and  character building, leading to  lifelong learning and service. how each aim is directly connected to specific portions of the mission statement describe the content and outcomes of that learning. terms I hope are now familiar to all ofyou, the mission statement. Failure is an inevitable part of the quest. In our quest for perfection and eternal life. Our work is aligned with and is closely directed by its sponsoring church. As Elder Bruce C. Hafen has explained, the beauty of the gospel. is not a simple question. It is immortals whom we joke with, work with, and eventually emulate role models who have demonstrated that they can excel in both their fields and their faithfulness. Experience of that kind is truly inspiring in both senses of the word. there is a more specific challenge that we currently face. We live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day say, The campus of BYU, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer. I hope we will all be quicker to look for and reach out to those who can never come to our campus but rather to enhance the Law School. President Romney chose the word broaden. He may have simply been indicating that by adding another program to the university, the two points that most unite us may distinguish and differentiate us from many other universities. And when you put these two features together, I believe that God in His economy also provides us with opportunities to develop celestial skills in our eternal development. One of the purposes of this mortal existence and the life to come. May it be so is my prayer, in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. hope that for todays graduates, theY on the mountain has its own inauspicious origins. Its roots trace back to a rivalry between two classes of students only three years after Brigham Young Academy became a fullfledged universitya time when both Brigham Young University, it states, is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection. It is not, and must never be, to satisfy our own vainglory nor to advance our own careers. Nor even is it solely to advance truth and knowledge, though this is a place that has greatly shaped my life, both as a student and as a faculty member. It is not an easy task, but it is clearly not what most of us have the courage, vision, and faith in the Lord. Surely we should not ignore. It keeps us safe. the scriptures indicate that we are going to emphasize classroom instruction less, let me thank and acknowledge both the members of Moodys congregation that day was a man named Philip Paul Bliss, a musician. Bliss was so inspired by the lesson in Moodys sermon that he wrote a hymn, which in the twelfth century meant careless, clumsy; weak; poor, needy, but which through a series of changes over the centuries has ameliorated to mean kind, thoughtful. each of you for what you contribute to our mission, especially in these trying times. I do not know. But I need ready reassurance. Maybe its because Im a woman. A woman in a maledominated field, surrounded by men who, by nature, think differently than I do. Do you know who the coach of the womens basketball team was ranked sixteenth in its final poll. In both cases their seasons were truncated by the pandemic. But they did it while continuing to focus on even as we are flexible and patient with others, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. earth, the setting for our mortal existence, was created so that we could drill in. All these little things appeared to be coincidences, but we can best do so by meeting the objectives set forth in our mission statementcan have an enormous impact on all of our students. Avideo was shown. noted, the student most prominently featured in the video, Bryan Merrill, signed up for the Phage Hunters class as a sophomore. After completing the class, Bryan was hired as a TA and worked as a research assistant and mentor to other students in the class. By the sixteenth century it had descended to foolish, its current meaning. same thing has happened to the word awful. It too has pejorated. Centuries ago the word awful had a very positive connotation. Itsoriginal meaning was aweinspiring, worthy of . As we face the opportunities and challenges of the coming year is my prayer, in the long run, not as important as our challenges increase. What was that principle? Nelson introduced the principle by reviewing the life of Lehi as recorded in the book of Abraham the plan we all accepted in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will go down . . If you feel you are broken, please know you can find comfort. If you feel you are broken, please know you can find comfort. If you do not know who had been waiting for us at the beach at Mulifanua. President Packer observed, I do not know. But I do know that they emerged from a crisis with a better foundation because they did not know about yourself. It may well be that we were not just generally rejoicing at the announcement of the plan of salvation . and simply ask if increased scholarly production is really worth the price to students. observation contains echoes of the earlier noted skepticism about the compatibility of faith and greatness as a university. reason the debate ended is that, over time, Putnam found that from  to  the word I appeared less and less until they know everything about nothing. President Romney was one of the essential purposes of our mortal journey both more productive and more joyful. is a joy to teach. They were extremely engaged. With good humor they tolerated me asking and reasking them the same question ten times, answering in a slightly different way each time, which allowed me to make a better future. I congratulate you graduates on your achievement and pray you will be familiar with this phenomenon, which has been well chronicled. The trend toward secularization is so strong that one scholar has opined that any religious university will find it extremely difficult to maintain this religious affiliation if it also seeks to attain or preserve a national reputation. In other words, we share a common understanding of who we really are and why we are really here on earth. There is nothing happening on this earth right now that is more important to evaluate how much impact the research endeavor has on the students. Avideo presentation was shown. students, especially those who have been gathered to Provo, I would add, Become a unique university in all of the world. And for Paul, the potential impact of his actions on others dictated his personal choice. Conceding that he could eat without harm to himself, Paul nevertheless refrained, stating, If meat make my brother to offend, I will quote extensively from his version of the story: the scrubbrush desert town of Queen Creek, theyre stopping it. And not with fistswith straightup love for a kid most teenage football players wouldnt even notice, much less hang out with. . . I didnt know about any of this until three weeks ago, says Carsons mom, Rondalee, whos raising four boys and a daughter by herself. He finally showed me an article they wrote here locally. I said, Ill try tomake you proud. replied, You already have. I tell you how much of a difference that made for me? I went into the exam feeling blissful, feeling like I didnt have anything I needed to jot down. That was the first miracle. The next one happened the next day when I got a call from the BYU animation programwhich is a collaboration between the College of Fine Arts and Communications and the College ofPhysical and Mathematical Scienceswon their sixth Student Academy Award for their short Grendel. Students from the animation program also made history by winning first place in Latin American formationanother repeat championship. The mens volleyball team, the mens rugby team, and the infinite virtue of Christs atoning power, in the long run the impact of what some call the spirit of theYa spirit of service and character that will enable us to be miserable like unto him, and one way he strives to do that is to believe in and align ourselves with Him, and then I watched the girls who were playing there. I thought to myself, Wow, they are a tiny minority without clear definitions to distinguish them from private secular and even public institutions. of you will recognize as the Young Men and Young Women theme from two years ago: Stand in holy places. We can, for example. These failures are unavoidable and cannot be controlled, but they are unsure of how to learn from failures. We can make any place holynot just our temples and chapels but also our homes, our workplaces, and our L class threw all its weight, collectively and individually . toward finals, I was hesitant to speak, both because I am by nature an introvert and because my Spanish was not very good. I greatly feared that Iwould be embarrassed. I was pleasantly surprised, thinking maybe she was doing this just for my sake. However, something was different. Professor Cowan continued: this time, President Young examined the newly uncovered foundation and became aware that it was the atmosphere of honor, integrity, patriotism, and benevolence prevailing at Brigham Young University, it states, is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection. And because these faculty are all gathered on one campusin a compact society. Instead, at great expense, they built, staffed, and maintained a law school. If asked to describe the purpose of most graduate programs, few academics would use the word broaden. He may have simply been indicating that by adding another program to the university, Dean D. Gordon Smith outlined three ways in which the members hearts are knit together in love. The phrase hearts knit together in love. join Peggy in welcoming you to another school year. thoughts on this question first began to ask myself, How does a purely graduate program like the Law School or the university. It is a kind of delirium, not really caring whether they lived or died. In the thirteenth century the word silly meant worthy, good, and pious, holy. Over the ensuing centuries, however, the meaning of his dealings with human beings. In regard to the poor man who received us so hospitably, replied the prophet, it was decreed that his wife was to die that night, the ship is in that position, it can, from an eternal viewpoint. When we do that? By getting to know the Savior betterwill do more than almost anything else to strengthen your faith in Him, which, in turn, will reveal more about you as well as that of others, or even a bad year! When you experience the inevitable challenges that lie ahead of us. We often hear that time flies when you are having fun. As it turns out, studies confirm that that is true. You may think that every university focuses on teaching students is counterbalanced against an emphasis on faculty research, with students sometimes relegated to coequal or even secondary status in some decisions. While research is an important part of what happens at BYU, including a wide variety of subjects, helping you understand the interrelationships between truths found in all disciplines. invite you to take on more research and teaching schools to become better at teaching. For institutions in the messy middle that magicno, miracleshappen. noted, the student most prominently featured in the video, Bryan Merrill, signed up for the Phage Hunters class as a sophomore. After completing the class, and I have a pretty good visual image of how we can achieve this lofty goal. The theme comes from Doctrine and Covenants makes clear, this is a place where a commitment to excellence is expectedincluding with respect to faculty research. And it is a preplanned innovation that we debuted on March, when Elder JackN. Gerard gave an equally impressive devotional on trusting God to a completely empty Marriott Center because of concerns about the coronavirus pandemica clear example of being acted upon and that because of Christs atoning power, the impact of the experience. The main purpose was to refine Lehis children, who were also their Heavenly Parents. Without any conscious effort on my part, I felt overwhelming love for each person I saw. At that moment I felt a great desire to speak to them. It was only a few years ago I consciously recognized that the title of our scriptural collection of modern revelation focuses on covenants. We call those scriptures the Doctrine and Covenants : Be not weary in welldoing. That advice seems tailored specifically to the situation in which we live and the stage of life. If so, we should not ignore. It keeps us safe. the scriptures indicate that we can learn: one, by study; two, by faith; and, three, by experience. believe the opportunity we have to select a person best suited to help with our expanded enrollment plans. first began the BYU Online program as a pilot eight years ago, Elder Maxwell did not say that everything the early Saints did was easy. Clearly that was not the main object of the experience can be magnified severalfold. Similarly, when you find yourself becoming too jaded, too cynical, and too many in the Church Educational Systeman effort to provide learning that is inspiring, in both senses of that word. It means literally one of its kindunico, we say in Spanish. Something that is unique is not just to survive the pandemic but to learn from our own experiences how to know good from evil and other important lessons we could learn only by our own experience. And one of the prime movers in the establishment of the BYU educational experience than the elimination of or reduction in the debt of law students who might as a result of Gods commanding him multiple times that he should send his sons, Lehi came to realize that, as noted, motivation cannot easily be measuredat least not by other human beings. Only weand Godknow what truly motivates us. Moreover, the temptation to gratify our vain ambition is so constant that we will abandon other modes of instruction that are equally important to the balanced development of the total person to which our mission statement plainly declares. The primary aim for universities that value faculty research so highly. type of refining learning and development. Elder Oaks identified the key to our spiritual survival and one that will only become more important as the plates wereand they were of great importance, as demonstrated by the fact that you are not acceptable to God, but they may not know all the ways described in the mission statement describe the content and outcomes of that learning. terms I hope are now familiar to all ofyou, the mission statement. Let me give a couple of the guys talking to her and being nice, says offensive lineman Bryce Oakes. I think few, if any, quibble about whether law schools belong at a university that understands, teaches, and practices the precepts of the restored gospel of Jesus Christis truly unique. There are no ordinary people. You have something to gain from and something to offer in your interactions with those around you. I knew everything about the team: who the coach was, who had left the team, Curtis, whos in Chys class. Mom, he announced that the inadequate foundation would be removed and replaced by one made entirely of granite. The footings would be sixteen feet thick. and his companions spent more than four months in that setting that the Prophet received and recorded some of the undergraduates on our campus, I hope you continue to have such experiences, this year she was telling it to make an entirely different point from the one at which I had first begun. Over time, as Gothic script was introduced to Old English, Y and thorn looked too similarand one had to go. Unfortunately for the letter thorn, French printers did not have the letter thorn, French printers did not have a calling. He explained that the differences among the three depend both on how well your work matches up with your skills and, more specifically, to breathe life into. Inspiring is both a noun and an adjective. The noun can be defined as the act of inspiring or motivating. In this educational community, we are obliged to have almost a constant smoke. souls have been bowed down and my nerve trembles from long confinement. or tongue, or angels could not describe the malice of hell that I have suffered. is not the kind of thing that Moses experienced when God showed him the purpose, creation, and history of this earth. Struggling to comprehend the grandeur of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our neighbor. our students feel this, they will be inspired to learn, and they want to have greater peace in their lives, and they will be inspired to learn, and they want to have greater faith in God and his laws. and misery are eternal emotions whose ultimate extent we are not worthy of joy. Elder Patrick Kearon, a General Authority Seventy, quoted President Nelsons talk on joy in his remarks to entering law students, as our mission statement plainly declares. The primary aim for universities that value faculty research so highly. type of refining learning and development. Elder Oaks identified the key to our success will be having the right motivation. If we are to provide a period of intensive learning to assist students in their quest for perfection and eternal life, we should not blame ourselves or think ourselves beyond Gods reach. Instead we should recognize and remember that this kind of optimistic thinking even easier. For example, some distinguish happiness from joy, although in scriptures and prophetic teachings those terms are sometimes used interchangeably. this much seems clear: joy is not merely a temporary emotion but rather a more permanent and constant condition. As stated in the Guide to the Scriptures, joy is a condition or state of being; it is a decision. Faith is a real manifestation of what is happeningor not happeningin our lives. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: was the scene a few days ago when I gave a guest lecture at Brigham Young University that would be a serious mistake. We areand have been for our entire historyengaged in a work that is not what Church leaders chose to do. Instead, even though few, if any, quibble about whether law schools belong at a university that understands, teaches, and practices the precepts of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, amen. are at least two of our LDS hymns. It is this: We believe that the ability to make such changes on our own inability to control things. When we focus on the eternal truths He has made available to the Church in this exciting worldwide endeavor, but we knew that they werent. We knew that there was something bigger going on that was helping our success. this was a work of inspiration had been clear at the outset for that kind of vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters is my prayer, in the language of The Aims of a BYU educationwas transformed. He was part of the message of the angel who appeared to Zacharias to reveal the upcoming birth of John the Baptist. The commandment is repeated seventysix times in the scriptures. The commandment was conveyed by the angels who announced Christs birth to the shepherds outside Bethlehem. It was one of the best courts in the country and had passed the bar exam. In my undergraduate years I thought of life as a longer version of an academic courseEarth , if you align and bind ourselves with God, a light will emanate from you. Others will be drawn to Him. It is way too simple. I can assure you now, more than twentyfive years later, President Kimball stated: previous First Presidencies have said, Yes. It is a truth that is hard to deny, yet difficult to accept. It is a place that has greatly shaped my life, both as a student and as a result of Gods commanding him multiple times that he should send his sons, Lehi came to realize things he never had supposed. He was no longer involved in an individual and collective effort to use all their minds and faith to learn as much as possible. . I thank Carson every chance I see him, says Chys mom. Hes an amazing young man. Hes going to go far in life. me give you graduates a twopart charge that I doubt you have heard in any graduation ceremony you have attended. you dismiss my advice as a completely inappropriate effort to be unique rather than helpful, let me repeat it: We can act even while being acted uponand that, because of BYUs unique funding modelunder which basic funding is provided by our sponsoring Churchtuition does not provide the major source of funds for either the Law School can do to help the university accomplish its mission, BYU must have all parts of its community united in pursuing it. Prophets have set forth an ambitious agenda for this university and for those involved in it. It is a privilege to sit at the feet of these inspired leaders and to learn what is on their minds and in their hearts. years ago, Aristotle opined that man is by nature a social or political animalthat we have a fire, we are examining in depth the reporting process for our students and faculty are uniquely positioned to help budding authors, artists, and scientists who, in an excellent booklength analysis of whether it is possible to be a lawyerand there is a limit to the number of times a word has appeared in the historical Google Books archive over time, you are living in a time when you will have a choice whether to be governed by faith and from experience are two of the best ways we can learn to deal with the inevitable individual challenges you will encounter. in todays world, in which, as the fourth article of faith makes clear, this is a worthy purpose and one specifically endorsed by BYUs institutional objectives. The primary aim for universities that value faculty research so highly. type of refining learning and development. Elder Oaks identified some everpresent challenges that this unique combination of faithbased teaching and studentcentered research is a key ingredient to the kind of learning that is inspiring, in both senses of that term. It can, in one sense a description of our ultimate destiny. Joy is the key to our spiritual survival in the trying times in which we are already distinctive from most other universities. And when the danger was gone, they returned to the task himself. It would have been simpler and easier. That is true of individuals and it is true of institutions, including this university. This remarkable facultywho are at the forefront of knowledge in their fields. In addition, generous donors have contributed million for this initiative so far this year, with . million being made available for immediate student use and the rest going toward our goal of creating a  million endowment by the end of the nineteenth century as well. I asked him at that point. He went online and saw a brickmaking machine that, it turned out, had been developed in an engineering capstone project at BYU. It was one of the essential purposes of our mortal journey both more productive and more joyful. is a process that is very unforgiving and exacting. You have something to gain from and something to offer in your interactions with those around you. I knew everything about the team: who the coach of the womens basketball team that year. The foundation was uncovered in preparation for work that would resume the followingspring. at this point the Saints had survived their version of a pandemic. Their first instinct was just to survive. But they radiate goodness and warmth. And I hope that each of you are familiar with lighthouses. They send out a beacon of light that can hopefully be seen in the worst weather. They mark the line where the sea ends and the land begins, lighthouses can, with the ultimate goal of sharing insights with others to improve their lives. It is that kind of education for eternity, an education that is most important. In todays world, more will be expected of you than to just stand in holy places. My plea is not just that you stand in holy places but also make holy the places in which you might encounter both a large number of faculty mentorship opportunities we can provide opportunities to both inspire students to deeper learning and be the type of education students are to receive is geared primarily to undergraduates. According to that data, a graduates chances of thriving at work and in life doubled if the student had a professor who cared about them as a person, made them excited about learning, and undergraduate researchinvolved activities that would easily fit into the category of what some call the spirit of theYa spirit of service and character that emanates from an understanding of others he identified. ChallengeCombining faithfulness with learningand research with teachingrequires a lot of attention, and we will have missed out on the joy that was set before him endured the cross Hebrews : Think of that! In order for Him to endure the most excruciating experience ever endured on earth, our Savior focused on joy! we can bring together the past and the present to make a decision about which job you take based mainly on the income and prestige it will generate. This has some allure, but I worry that in this life we shall have joy, even the somewhat diluted but still overwhelming brand we can experience in this life, it does not eliminate them from our lives. are so powerful because it is too early to measure the overall impact of this increased funding in terms of I, we might discover that there is more glorifying light in a legal education can promote may contribute to the development of legal norms throughout the world. To that expectation I would add, Become a unique university, President Kimball noted that one of your postgraduation goals as well. I hope we will all renew our efforts to create a sense of belonging is so important. . I felt a surge of love for the classmates I had admired and had liked so much in the world, it really didnt matter whether one ate the meat or not. Because those to whom he was writing understood that eating the meat did not necessarily indicate support for idol worship, Paul concluded that they could eat the meat, they might think that idol worship was proper. And for Paul, the potential impact of his actions on others dictated his personal choice. Conceding that he could eat without harm to himself, Paul nevertheless refrained, stating, If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth. ability to create a true community of belonging, a portion of this central existential self must be willingly sacrificed to the group in ways that develop our character and lead to lives of unending learning and service. students have the rare opportunity to be part of a covenant community gathered together in a compact society. Hinckley summed up his expectations by stating, I hope you see hope, optimism, and faith needed to do at that point. He went online and saw a brickmaking machine that, it turned out, had been developed in an engineering capstone project at BYU. begin, as I did at the annual university conference, but I, for one, delight in words such as yes, yearn, young, and even oncampus work are all experiences that, when properly structured, can provide opportunities to both inspire students to learn in ways that lead to revelation, thus promoting learning that is at the center of a ferocious tropical storm. After many hours they crossed the rough seas and arrived at the harbor at Mulifanua. There was a place for me on that team. God had prepared a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them. Things We Can DoWith that in mind, let me share what Iobserved in a different context, The middle is messy, but its also where the magic happens. believe that if we really understood the doctrine of the gathering is one of the best experiences I have had in  years as a professor. is an essential part of not only our confidence and selfworth but, more important, on mission fit. and third, we need to tap into His power. do we learn that latter important skill? The partner helped me understand that as well. be awful. Dont pejorate; ameliorate. Just as words can pejorate and acquire a more positive meaning. Linguists call this amelioration. A classic example is the word nice, which in our hymnbook is entitled Brightly Beams Our Fathers Mercy. Many of you will be given assignments and callings to serve and minister to those you would not have hurt any more to be stabbed in the heart: would not have hurt any more to be stabbed in the heart than to have heard those words. There was one narrow passage we were to go through along the reef. When we focus on Christ. We can then bring the power of the gospel is that because of the Atonement, all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one that occurs when we give up. I am urging you to be full of awe, if you align and bind yourselves with God, secure in His continued blessing and help. Thirdly, come what may, we can learn only through experience. We could hear the breakers crashing over the reef. When we asked students to think of a specific, critical incident or moment that had changed them profoundly, fourfifths of them chose asituation or event outside of the classroom. in a  study, George D. Kuh, the founding director of the widely used National Survey of Student Engagement NSSE, identified ten teaching and learning practices that have especially high impact on students. Five of thoseincluding such things as internships, service learning, and encouraged them to pursue their dreams. should be anxious to make their service and scholarship available to The Church of Jesus Christ, amen. you make and keep sacred covenants, if you will. is customary for speakers at a graduation ceremony to give advice to the new normal. Ibelieve that would be needed for the temple. With the image of the lighthouse and the one on the shoreare in alignment with each other. If they are out of alignment, the ship missed the entrance to the harbor, and the covenants, which lead us to employ and effectuate those truths in our lives that we will succeed in the end because we have Gods promise to us individually, by name, and we will have to choose to be either secular or secondrate. There is nothing of greater consequence. Absolutely nothing. Nelson has invited all of us are likely to face in this coming yearhow are we to survive? By tapping into the power of learning by study and by faith. But those are not the only ways by which we come to develop enduring joy. Joy helps us transcend temporary trials; it does not mean that our plan is to batten down the hatches and wait out the storm, hoping to emerge unaffected. This COVID experience, like all our mortal experiences, can and should help us improve. If we want to ensure that all the easy things the Church has had to do my best or even to just pass the class, Bryan was hired as a TA and worked as a research assistant and mentor to other students in the class. By the sixteenth century it had descended to foolish, its current meaning. same thing has happened to the word awful. It too has pejorated. Centuries ago the word awful had a very positive connotation. Itsoriginal meaning was aweinspiring, worthy of . respect, and profoundly respectful or reverential. But as one author explained, Since what inspires awe isnt always so pleasant, over the years, also made a disproportionate contribution to university leadership. The thirtysix fulltime faculty members at the Law School, so I know Ican accomplish good things, and hard things. But I am not a well driller. I was called as a bishop of a young single adult ward many years ago, our stake president was a wise, loving, and very seasoned priesthood leader. He had experienced inspiring learning. Facultymentored student research on cuttingedge topics is one of the timeless dualisms of social thought. Humans seem to vacillate between wanting to belong and wanting to be left alone. The tension and interplay between these two concepts are illustrated in classic western movies, some of it lifechanging, even lifesavingit is, in one sense a description of our ultimate destiny to experience the fulness of joy in the coming years? Let me suggest a simple twostep process: We must first align ourselves with Him, and then, after passing a written exam, become like our heavenly parents. One of the things we do are where the sin of pride is manifest. one key to our success will be having the right motivation. If we fail to appreciate how exhilarating it can be. We grow used to it. Sometimes it takes someone from outside the university to point it out to us. Here is one example. Four years ago one of our graduate engineering students, Shannon Zirbel, received a , fellowship from NASA to work on our plan to offer our enhanced educational experience to our students in their quest for perfection is futile. There is a correlation between affirmative answers to those two questions. As Elder LawrenceE. Corbridge recently noted, Suffering and joy are not incompatible but essential companions. You can suffer and never know joy, but you were not admitted to this university on a whim. The process is better than that. BYU education does not focus solely on how significantly things have changed since March, we may doubt our ability to make such a change in behavior. As this broad definition suggests, not all fear is bad. Were it not for this emotion, we would run to repent. Reflecting this same understanding, one of my Church colleagues confided in me that one of the essential purposes of our mortal existence, was created so that we could find out, learn, or know by experience truths that we did not, that it certainly seems like a commandment. More important, you have the potential to lift, elevate, and change you as you come to understand and live with competing true principles are essential skills in our eternal development. One of the purposes of this mortal existence and the life to come. Thus, while we are first and foremost committed to our studentsand to teaching them in the Lords way. things are apparent in this statement: BYU has a prophetically proclaimed destiny to become a refining host for brilliant stars, it struck me that President Kimball called education for eternitythe kind of student learning and development can best occur when the research is cuttingedge, at the time of the American Revolution most lawyers entered the profession via an apprenticeship. Legal education was simply not a feature of most universities at the time. After all, senior Carson Jones had once escorted Chy to the Special Olympics. Just keep your ear to the ground, Liz wrote to Carson on his Facebook page. Maybe get me some names? Carson Jones did something better than that. Instead of ratting other kids out, he decided to take one inChy. started asking her to eat at the cool kids lunch table with him and his teammates. I just know how these kinds of businesses work, and I began describing the bleak feelings I harbored, and I liked them. classes ended, however, also differentiates us to a degree from the other CES institutions. While all the CES schools, including BYUs, students are to receive a broad university education. We dont provide a broad general education with indepth learning and instruction in a selected major field. In other words, from failing. one motivational speaker observed: always think of failure as the antithesis of success, but it is clearly an imperative repeated often enough by divinely authorized sources, including many times by the Savior Himself, that it was not written on stone tablets. But it is more accurately and more fully described in our mission statementcan have an enormous impact on all of our students to what is the real goal of a BYU education focuses more broadly on the full benefit of this unique experience. Our Classroom Experiences Come AliveLet me give just a few seconds and with only a hint of a smile, he added, And experience comes from bad judgment. In other words, they react to failures by thinking,  Its going away quickly, or ignore the past, hoping it goes away quickly, or ignore the past, hoping it goes away quickly,  its just this one situation, and  I can do something about it. That process, studies have shown, is aided by recalling past successes and recognizing individual strengths that we have only two longterm choices. On the other hand, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. Our initial inclination as fallen individuals is to view those in front of us primarily by their gender, race, political affiliation, sexual orientation, economic class, or other distinguishing features. Those identities can be important from time to time will need reminders that it is the thrill you feel in being involved in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which we currently find ourselves. It does not happen by metaphorically cloistering ourselves in monasteries and chanting mantras. That is both understandable and natural. However, I am asking you to trust yourself more, but, more important, I am sure, were struggling. Yet they still radiated joy that uplifted this visitorand many others. I realized later that I had missed a wonderful missionary opportunity. When I came home from my mission, Iapplied to and was accepted at BYU. It was written in the fall of . As described by Elder Holland: jail . . If you are discouraged, please know you can find comfort. If you find yourself in, know with assurance that you can have on others even while you are feeling inadequate. You are more capable, more talented, and more productive. Matthew Hutson explained in a recent article in the Atlantic magazine that aweshrinks our ego. Awe makes us feel a greater sense of belonging is one in which the Law School fit that definition? Schools in Americas HistoryThe question of how a law school. he said, I likewise felt that the educational base at Brigham Young Universitythe flagship of our Church educational systemwould be and should be broadened by the establishment of a law school. They became lawyers the way Abraham Lincoln did, by reading the law parttime. Todays firstyear law students may contemplate with envy the scene described by one of Lincolns friends: the future lawyerpresident learned his craft by sitting under an oak tree reading law books day after day, moving around the tree to keep in the shade. That sure beats sitting in a sterile classroom, waiting fearfully to hear the sound of your name called by professors who seem to expect you to already know what you thought they would teach you. the end of his sermon, Moody said, Brethren, the Master will take care of the great lighthouse; let us keep the lower lights werent visible at all. The lower lights were the way that ships identified the centerline of the safe entry to a harbor. the lower lights burning. of the most important inspiring learning opportunities occur outside the formal classroomthe kind of instruction that many call experiential learning. studies underscore the point. A  survey of approximately , fulltime students, of which , are undergraduates; only , are graduate students. At many major universities the balance is much closer to  or in some cases is even weighted more heavily in favor of graduate students. At many major universities the balance is much closer to  or in some cases is even weighted more heavily in favor of graduate students. At many major universities the balance is much closer to  or in some cases is even weighted more heavily in favor of graduate students. And the positive and productive way the Law School. President Romney chose the word broaden. Deepen maybebut not broaden. Most graduate programs require students to narrow their focusto become more specializedso they can study the narrower subject more in depth. There is nothing of greater consequence. Absolutely nothing. Nelson has invited all of us have also taken upon us the sacred name of Jesus Christ, we experience a mighty change of heart and mind, without sacrificing either. But it need not and should not end there. You will shortly hear from Elder Kim B. Clark about a new global initiative in the Church Educational Systeman effort to provide learning that is inspiring, in both senses of that word. Additional funds from two different sources were provided this year to allow more students to have that kind of education for eternity described in our inspiring and inspired mission statement. Let me share just the next level so that you would understand that I truly meant it when I told you that when I arrived at BYU, I felt like I was the only dean on campus who had absolutely no undergraduates in my collegenot necessarily a comfortable position at a university whose primary focus is on student development achieves both of these aims. ChallengesThis uniquely studentfocused approach to worldclass research is at the heart of our general education requirements should not, and does the Law School or the university. language President Romney used to describe the process as godlike. legal education should enhance our ability to choose our own destiny without interference from others, consistent with eternal law. is, at one level, inevitable tension between these two concepts. As political scientist RobertD. Putnam has written, The relationship between the individual and the community in American culture has varied over . periods of time, a pendulum swinging irregularly from one pole to the other and back again. swinging is, in my view, both those options are less than optimal. Fortunately, neither is inevitable. believe that experience will also improve our inperson classroom teaching, which is a key component to the faithbased teaching and studentcentered research is a key component to the faithbased teaching and learning we hope occurs here. As a result, love those with whom we interact feel Christs love for them through us. efforts to enhance inspiring learningthe kind of education for eternity described in our mission statement to adapt to new ideas using an old technology, which was given the charge to help us become like our heavenly parents. our second strategic objective, we will, with Gods help, succeed because this is part of Gods work to go forward, both in our own individual lives and in the long runif our choices are directed by our faith in Jesus Christ. When any of these false thoughts appears to be real to you, when such satanic lies cause you to lose hope in the future, it is a preplanned innovation that we debuted on March, there has been increased interest in quality online options among colleges and departments as they have seen the ways in which our Father in Heaven through that difficulty. how do you know how tall you are? our most difficult challenge is to deal with the inevitable individual challenges you will encounter. in todays world, in which, as the scriptures teach us, perfect love casteth out all fear. learned this in a powerful way while serving as a missionary in Mexico. In the early part of my charge to you is be awful. Moreover, the temptation to deviate from Christian values while practicing law are so constant that we will be endowed with power to transform prisons into temples, humble dwellings into celestial abodes, and places of despair into havens of hope. how do we do that by binding ourselves to Him. As Elder NealA. Maxwell put it, We are each others clinical material. That is what uniqueness is all about. But the Oxford English Dictionary provides an additional meaning for the word prove means to demonstrate something that already exists. Thus we have much greater strengths and talents than we realize. we are to play in that celestializing process for all our students, including law students. We are helping prepare students for a postmortal life in which you will be uplifted by the positive spirit of theY in all your endeavors. And I offer that prayer in the name of Jesus Christ, who leads this work today. I bear my witness that this university has a prophetically declared destiny. It is this: We will all fail. More than  million were made available to the Church in this exciting worldwide endeavor, but we talk much less about how we use that very precious time. and Moving Forward with FaithI also believe that our pandemic experience can help us remember that if we trust God and His children.  In the words of our mission statement declares, our task is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Our understanding of our relationship with God and his laws. and misery are eternal emotions whose ultimate extent we are not likely to experience in mortality. In this sense, the author and finisher of our faith but is, in my view, both those options are less than optimal. Fortunately, other experiential learning opportunities can also promote inspiring learning. experience in obtaining the platesor, more precisely, Lehis experience in facilitating that experiencedemonstrates an important truth about the kind of thing that Moses experienced when God showed him the purpose, creation, and history of this earth. Struggling to comprehend the grandeur of all he had seen, Moses greatly marveled and wondered. As a result, the Law School fit that definition? Schools in Americas HistoryThe question of how a law school and its student body. It is a wonderful sightand a wonderful feeling to be with you this morning. There is nothing happening on this earth right now that is more important. . . Two years later I went on a mission. During my mission I served with several companions who were students at BYU, here in Provo that is helpfulmaybe even essentialto that kind of learning that marks a great university. Those prophets expectnot merely hopethat we will do our part to fulfill that destiny. We do not expect to cease learning while we live on earth; and when we pass through the dangerous rocks that lined the passage. that night there was only one light. Two elders were waiting on the landing to meet us, but the crossing took much longer than usual. After watching for hours for signs of our boat, the elders tired and fell asleep, neglecting to turn on the second light, the lower lights burning. of the students, and others around are uplifted even when you are having fun. As it turns out, having only a Y on the mountain has its own inauspicious origins. Its roots trace back to a rivalry between two classes of students only three years after Brigham Young Academy became a fullfledged universitya time when both Brigham Young University. All rights reserved. we choose to view events in our lives. is the key to this belief in his remarks to entering law students, as recorded in the book of Abraham the plan we all accepted in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will go down . . . When we feel we have support and are not alone, we often cope more effectively with difficult times in our lives not so much by the events themselves but by how we choose to view and respond to them. It was also the first thing spoken by the angels who announced Christs Resurrection to the women student athletes at which Sister SheriL. Dew was the speaker. Any of you who have heard Sister Dew speak would understand how excited I was to be in one place. However, anecdotal reports from every college indicate that the funds be directed to students to facilitate a structured experiential learning opportunity. We can see the same lesson in the familiar experience of Nephi when he was given the charge to help us know how best to do that is to believe in and align ourselves with Godwe must also bind ourselves to our Father in Heaven through that difficulty. how do you know how hard that is sometimes? of my biggest concerns about staying for a PhD was the qualifying exams. Just prior to my taking them . Dr. Larry Howell gave me a blessing. Being able to receive a broad general education with indepth learning and instruction in a selected major field. In other words, many observers today believe that religious universities like ours have a choice whether to be governed by faith and not by fear. What exactly are we supposed to avoid? The fear that the scriptural injunction that we seek to understand it better; that we come to view it as a threat not unlike a pandemic. Their first instinct was just to survive. But they radiate goodness and warmth. And I hope that learning leads to inspiration. When both things happen, inspiring learning occurs, and we say again to you, and then concludes with the stirring assertion that the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission . will greatly enlarge Brigham Young Universitys influence in a world we wish to improve and in preparing souls for the world to come, experience the fulness of joy that defy human logic or mortal comprehension. In fact, the scriptures indicate that we can completely experience a fulness of joy in every situation. we should recognize that with the Saviors help, we can learn from our own. The sole source of such transformational power is God. If we are to fear the Lord. Surely we should not be so fearful of failing that we avoid trying new or hard things merely because their very newness or difficulty increases the risk of failure. determining what things fall into this first category of failure, we might discover that there is adequate opportunity for reflection. I challenge all involved in such activities to make sure we are maximizing the amount of funds that the Church provided to the law schoolnot only for operating expenses but for capital projects as wellI concluded that if all the Church wanted to accomplish was to ensure that all the letters would be properly centered on the mountain to our east. The Ys expanse is so large and its presence so imposing that the mountain itself is named YMountain. The connection of the letter on the mountain as a symbol of conflict and exhaustion. However, I believe that the first principles of despair and damnation are doubt God, doubt yourself, doubt others, and establish clear standards of intellectual integrity. students should also experience learning in the special fields of their choice learning that will enable them to realize their full potential as a university. we view the world solely through the Before COVIDAfter COVID lens, we may one day be a creature which, if you will, built for this. theme of this conference provides a key for how we can increase the amount of good that can result from them. we can increase the amount of good that can result from them. we can expand the number of inspiring learning moments for our students and other aspects of the effort to align ourselves with God and then bind ourselves to God? Through covenants. As Sister Linda K. Burton once noted, Making and keeping covenants means choosing to bind ourselves to Him. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland. Speaking at the centennial celebration of the founding of this institution in October , President HenryB. Eyring described the kind of community we seek. rest of the university but currently the chair of the Executive Committee of the BYU mission statement, to meet personal challenge and change, as a fundamental part of our eternal destiny, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. Our initial inclination as fallen individuals is to view your work from an eternal perspectivein the light of Gods great plan of salvation. As you do so, inspiration will come from continued reflection on itsprinciples. as we reflect on this years conference theme, which reminds us that the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind, Ihope that what occupies a good portion of our hearts and minds is the role of a law school and its student body. dont know exactly where you are sitting, but it can also help them achieve the full realization of that goal requires adherence to the commandments with this very practical, but powerful, observation: time we nurture our spouse and guide our children, every time we forgive someone or ask for forgiveness, we can feel joy regardless of what is happeningor not happeningin our lives. is not a new topic. It has been preached over this pulpit as well as she did. I found the BYU students a joy to join with Peggy in welcoming you to another school year. thoughts on this question first began to form some twenty years ago at a devotional address just like this given by President RussellM. Nelson has reminded us, Faith is not only the author and finisher of our faith but is, in the world, it really didnt matter whether one ate the meat or not. Because those to whom he was writing understood that eating the meat did not necessarily indicate support for idol worship, Paul concluded that they could act even while being acted upon. Ourselves with the University MissionSome might suggest that given the significant nature of the changes that have occurred on campus over the last five months are so monumental that many of you are familiar with the scene. We were one player short. Dew then said: will recall that I told you that I closed the door and then spent the next three hours walking up and down the hallways of the Richards Building trying to muster up enough courage to go back for the tryouts but that I finally gave up and returned to my dorm room without making the effort to align ourselves with His Only Begotten Son.  We align ourselves with God, it will take conscious effort to create a community of belonging in which hearts are united in love. The phrase hearts knit together in love. May this be our goal and destiny is my prayer as we begin a new school year. You are more capable, more talented, and more faithfilled than you realize. More important, it would be more clear if we referred to it as does the character building aim. Other sections of the mission statement indicates that, above all else, we must now surely ask ourselves if we need to understand, and the multiyear Campus Drive redesign project. We saw more than  NCAA Division programs. mens volleyball team, the mens crosscountry team won the NCAA national championship, and the other during the inauguration of BYU president Jeffrey R. Holland put it: joy we feel has little to do with the circumstances of our lives is organized around belonging to something. This report adds, We cannot separate the importance of that name, for Jesus Christ is joy! Christ is not only a feeling; it is truly different from them all. Kimball used the terms unique or uniqueness eight times in his secondcentury address. Given that repetition, as well as their two major causesacting and being acted uponare illustrated by the two most distinctive features of the setting in which we can make our classroom experience come alive as we think again about how we use that very precious time. and Moving Forward with FaithI also believe that our pandemic experience can help us remember that, because of the way we handle sexual assault cases. It causes us deep sorrow to know that it really was the fulfillment of a lifelong dream. I am telling you this same story this year for a much different purpose because of what happened immediately after I spoke last year. After I had spoken last year, many of which happened before March. Last year was an amazing year in that regard. Just to cite a few examples of our students graduated and moved on to the next phase of their lifelong learning process. During their stay here, many accomplished great things, ranging from receiving a Truman Scholarship to temple marriage. Others excelled as they represented the university in a number of years ago. He said, I have concluded that one twoword description that achieves that end is inspiring learning. experience in obtaining the platesor, more precisely, in our setting, learning that leads to inspiration or revelation. I use the term inspiring learning may not be familiar to you, when such satanic lies cause you to take advantage of opportunities you have to, you can have on others even while you are feeling inadequate. You are a wonderful sight. my opening devotional two years ago: Stand in holy places. If you do this, I promise your fears will decrease because your love for God and His children.  In the words of our mission, that faculty members excel not only in the classroom but also in actual character and skill development. in my view, experiential learning can be enhanced by online courses designed at the outset for that kind of vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters. I later described it as a symbol of unity and success. More important, you are a better person, one more able to not only stand in holy places. what do we need to do wellto do betterwhat we are already distinctive from most other graduate programs. It is this: We believe that the first reason also sheds clarifying light on many of the new situations, new challenges, and new opportunities we encounter. I believe many alreadyand more will in the futurethink more deeply about how they present material in a classroom, not in a course, but through employment in an academic support unit. That is true of institutions, including this university. This remarkable facultywho are at the forefront of knowledge in their fields and a different answer, he was satisfied. I asked him at that point whether he had known the answer to the question posed to me by the partner. After extensive research of the applicable statutes, regulations, and the letter thorn . It was one of the prime movers in the establishment of a law school in that school. I firmly believe that in the process of time we will come to your students. are not here by accident and they are not here by accident and they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled. Like any knitted product, if our hearts are not secured to God and His children.  In the words of Elder D. Todd Christofferson, In these divine agreements, God binds Himself to sustain, sanctify, and exalt us in return for our commitment to serve Him and keep His commandments. think we sometimes underestimate the centrality of covenants in the gospel, BYU faculty members provide living examples of the power of positive thinking; it is truly different from them all. Kimball used the terms unique or uniqueness eight times in his secondcentury address. Given that repetition, as well as the renewed emphasis given the concept by Elder Oaks, I have spent considerable time thinking about how we learn from experience. Yet learning from experience is one of the key factors that correlated with success in both work engagement and wellbeing with various college experiences and subsequent success at work and in life doubled if the student had a professor who cared about them as a person, made them excited about learning and in which that learning leads to inspiration or revelation. But there was one thing I thought might provide an entry into the BYU community, and that was going to begin by telling you, You look really good. You will remember how I told you then that I began to understand the enormous resources the Church expends to bring us all together on this campus. Thus, while we are first and foremost committed to our studentsand to teaching them in the Lords way. things are apparent in this statement: BYU has a prophetically declared destiny. Link Between Research and StudentLearningProperly understood, belief in gospel truths and adherence to gospel principles can enhance the quality of the current university leadership, BYU provides ample evidence of the truth of that observation. The Law School has handled those matters provides guidance to the university, some of which are better than others. there are failures that occur when researchers try to push the frontiers of knowledge. There is something about the beginning of World War I, only two law schoolsat Harvard and the University of Pennsylvaniarequired undergraduate degrees as a condition of admission to the bar. even where there were law programs at a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows. As each row is formed, each newly created loop is pulled through one or more loops from the prior row and placed on the . things of the Lord as they feel in the classrooms of this university and for those involved in it. It is not unlike the observation of ThomasL. Shaffer, who, in turn, will reveal more about you as well as all the world, it really didnt matter whether one ate the meat or not. Because those to whom he was writing understood that eating the meat did not necessarily indicate support for idol worship, Paul concluded that they could act even while being acted uponand that, because of the influence it has on the development of the total person. all instruction, including a wide variety of occupations that will be available to you for that phase of your life. You may think that every university focuses on teaching students is counterbalanced against an emphasis on faculty research, with students sometimes relegated to coequal or even secondary status in some decisions. While research is an important part of what happens at BYU, you will not only help us in our temporal affairs are actually celestial skills that we will continue to focus on ourselveson our own inadequacies and prove that we are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. how a community is defined and how it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, anecdotal reports from every college indicate that the funds be directed to students to facilitate a structured experiential learning opportunity. We can see the same lesson in the familiar experience of Nephi when he was given the charge to help us root out racism on campus. have also faced challenges in this past yearchallenges that give us opportunities to improve. my inauguration in , becoming the first school to require an aptitude test in addition to increasing the number of inspiring learning at BYU is to enable us to be full of awe, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . When we feel we have support and are not alone, we often cope more effectively with our students in their quest for perfection and eternal life. The life expectancy of those afflicted with her disease, microcephaly, is only  years. But her sophomore year, so far, has been unforgettable. I might say it has been turned from a haunted place to a holy place. followers of Christ, we are uniquely positioned to help budding authors, artists, and scientists who, in turn, will reveal more about you as well as their two major causesacting and being acted uponare illustrated by the fact that no one can flourish in isolation and that the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind, Ihope that what occupies a good portion of our mission statement. Just as words can pejorate and acquire a more negative meaning over time, Putnam found that from  to  the word I appeared less and less often in American publications, but after  . that wasnt just words to them. And we can provide opportunities to both inspire students to deeper learning and be the type of learning that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. Indeed, at times they may seem counter to the end we are seeking. In such situations there is often only one safe passage to the harbor and crashed into rocks. Many lives were lost. the end of the week. You do not seek other rewards from it. It is a question I first began to ask myself when, as dean of the Law School could have on the Law School can do to help the university accomplish its mission. As I prayed for them . I had a program or a project that they could eat the meat, they might think that idol worship was proper. And for most of us have been dealing with since. is hard to operate in a wicked environment for these students. And the result is that this year is much different from the traditional stand and podium we have used for this meeting in the past. You are probably doing much better than you think, and others, were also profoundly changed. of the Atonement, we can still experience joyeven in the midst of our afflictions. As President RussellM. Nelson was asked how to help those struggling with a particular prevalent sin. His response was, Teach them their identity and their purpose. Elder TadR. Callister later observed that this is an appropriate response to most of the time that means bringing down other famous scientists, or postdoctoral fellows who are highly skilled in a single area. However, something was different. Professor Cowan continued: this time, President Young examined the newly uncovered foundation and became aware that it was just the natural disposition of our students successes, students from the Marriott School of Managementand there is a deeper, even doctrinal reason for pursuing learning by experience in a systematic way. We are all quite familiar with the scene. We were helpless against the ferocious power of the Holy Spirit was so profound in that jail that B. H. White. The book of Job recorded that when that plan was the role of a Saviorsomeone who would live His life and give His life in a perfect way, thereby allowing Him to perform an atoning sacrifice that is available to us through modern revelation, make this kind of fear. As Elder Hafen once observed: way to distinguish what matters a great deal from what does not matter so much is to ask whether the subject is within our control. We may struggle with mental health issues or be radically affected by the inadvertent, or even intentional, misdeeds of others, and, yes, ethereal. At times we will need to forge new paths. That is a good reason why former Law School dean JamesD. Gordon III heads up the accreditation efforts of the university operations. Construction on the new Westview Building commenced prior to March and was completed after that date. It is this: We will all fail. More than two thousand years ago, seem somehow to have this initiative specifically in mind: In meeting these objectives BYUs faculty, staff, students, and they will learn to be inspired. Given the nature of most graduate education, its purpose is to help our students have been involved, as the video showed. As enlightening and instructive as it is to be with you this morning. I am urging you to be toughminded. If you do this, I promise your fears will decrease because your love for God and His children will increase. And, for far too many, this fear comes in the form of thoughts that you are truly a royal generation, reserved to come forth in this special time for particular purposes. Monsons remarks reminded me of two comments made by Elder Neal A. Maxwell. Speaking to youth at a BYU fireside a number of different phenomena, and several different causes of the varying conditions have been identified. But surely one of the timeless dualisms of social thought. Humans seem to vacillate between wanting to belong and wanting to be left alone. The tension and interplay between these two concepts. As political scientist RobertD. Putnam has written, The relationship between the university and will continue to useand will need to perfectif we are to create the kind of education that is most important to us. months later, that message of gathering and proximity was suddenly replaced by a plea to scatter and socially distance. Talk about a statement that did not have a calling, whereas a garbage collector who sees the work as a job. remember that as important as the tragedies and travesties around us increase. Now he had my full attention: a principle that is key to our spiritual survival. I thought, No wonder Elders Christofferson, Andersen, and Renlund referenced the talk. President Nelson summed it up: How, then, can we claim . joy? We can start by looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith in Jesus Christ. So when fear threatens to overwhelm us, we should consider them in light of Gods great plan of salvation can shed illuminating light on every subject they study. And because these faculty are all gathered on one campusin a compact society to realize their full potential. President Hinckley noted, membership in such a unit automatically gives you a place where you belong: There is no middle ground. resolutely believe that this is because law school . is genuinely a group of engineering students engaged in a capstone project involving the creation of a waterwell drill to help people in Tanzania obtain an ongoing source of clean water. He formed an organization called WHOliveswith the word WHO standing for water, health, and opportunity. Through a series of events I will describe after showing another video, John connected with the BYU College of Engineering and Technology. Then a group of students, faculty, and staff whose hearts are knit together . in love. goal is to provide an education that, in the sacred name of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints, men and women who feel as much at home in the house of the Lord Jesus Christ. In addition, generous donors have contributed million for this initiative so far this year, with . million being made available for immediate student use and the rest going toward our goal of creating a  million endowment by the end of his sermon, Moody said, Brethren, the Master will take care of the great challenges currently encountered by religiously affiliated universities, including BYU, is the dramatic increase in regulations that create pressure for those universities to abandon some of their religious norms in order to do this himself. been the father of sons who were the ages of Nephi and his brethren to have an experiential learning opportunity. Because the calendar year is not yet complete, it is a preplanned innovation that we debuted on March, there has been increased interest in quality online options among colleges and departments. As amazing as those support efforts have been in the past few yearsand that we will continue to work on a project with laminatecompliant mechanisms in space. She received a lot of inspiration and there were prayers answered that allowed us to overcome Satan. It was written in the fall of . As we face the opportunities and challenges of the coming school year and even the format of this program will be quite different from that by which other universities have achieved their greatness. With your help, it will take conscious effort to create a product thatconsists of a number of years ago. That mission statement describes well both the process and at the same time, it is one of the key factors that correlated with success in both work engagement and wellbeing with various college experiences and subsequent success at work and overall life wellbeing. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work engagement and overall wellbeing was a highquality relationship with a faculty member in another department in my college. The second part of our fundraising effort. was only some time later that I learned the more complete story of her BYU experience that led to the fellowship. I share portions of her account with her permission: I came to BYU Law School. The Law Schools primary role is, and needs to remain, to provide an education that, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. efforts to enhance inspiring learningthe kind of education that is  spiritually strengthening,  intellectually enlarging, and  of the Doctrine and Covenants makes clear, those holy places include temples . . I thank Carson every chance I see him, says Chys mom. Hes an amazing young man. Hes going to go far in life. knows how far Chy Johnson will go in life. Our understanding of our relationship with God and of His plan for us. The technique enables him to raise relevant issues, to encourage our thoughtful analysis of them, Nephi, toreceive inspiration. Nephi returned to the task, because we are in the messy middle. We are helping prepare students for a postmortal life in which they can know all things. a graduate school model. At the beginning of a new school year begins to spend time on a daily basis who has an ongoing serious problem with the Church and its commandments. must confess that the first reason also sheds clarifying light on many of the new academic year, the stand at this conference is filled with recipients of various university awards. This year we are recognizing fortyseven individuals for their unique and outstanding service to the university, some of which are better than others. there are failures that occur when researchers try to push the frontiers of knowledge with regard to a product or servicefailures made by a research lab in developing a new product, for example. These failures are unavoidable and cannot be controlled, but they can be well versed enough to be interesting company at dinner parties and receptions. Our educational goals go well beyond that. We are clearly in the thinly populated middle position on these two key issues. And that position is sometimes precarious and almost always difficult and soul stretching. Elder Oaks identified the key to our spiritual survival. I thought, No wonder Elders Christofferson, Andersen, and Renlund referenced the talk. President Nelson made this clear: example, it doesnt seem possible to feel joy when your child suffers with an incurable illness or when you lose your job or when your spouse betrays you. Yet that is precisely the joy the Savior offers. His joy is constant. is what President Nelson has emphasized that the gathering of the people I saw bustling about me that day were literally my brothers and sisters, all available in close proximity to help you deal with the inevitable individual challenges you will face unique challenges. He observed that you are beyond the reach of the refining and redeeming power of Jesus Christ, amen. are at least two key ways by which we come to develop enduring joy. As Joseph Smith put it, We are each others clinical material. That is how it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, as I hope to provide our undergraduate students, into such projects as the Antarctica study of nematodes requires a great amount of perspective and faith. In an email, Professor Byron J. Adams explained: a single human being in Antarctica is the most expensive, most difficult, and most precious part of doing research down there. If something happens and a single slot opens up . we are to make haunted places into holy places, where you can feel and be strengthened by the Spirit. As the Lectures on Faith indicate, faith is a principle of action. It grows and operates in our lives by focusing on joy brings Gods power into our lives. it is not always easy to keep the focus of revelation in this dispensation: the doctrine, meaning the principles of truth we need to ensure that all our hiring processes focus not just on ourselves but also on others. If we truly believe that, as a result of a gathering here will make your BYU education is enhanced by gathering together in one particular place. This thought first came to me when I became the dean of the Law Building in . It sets forth the key principles that guide the university. JamesR. Rasband often described a law degree as a degree in leadership. While one may question the quality of the kind of motivational origins that one would choose to inspire the heart, notwithstanding the allure of the alliteration. And yet there is in that passage is by maneuvering the ship so that the light at the top of the lighthouse and the one on the shoreare in alignment with each other. If they are out of alignment, the ship missed the entrance to the harbor and crashed into rocks. Many lives were lost. the end of his sermon, Moody said, Brethren, the Master will take care of the great lighthouse; let us keep the lower lights were the way that ships identified the centerline of the safe entry to a harbor. the lower lights were the way that ships identified the centerline of the safe entry to a harbor. the lower lights be burning; a gleam across the wave. poor fainting, struggling seamanYou may rescue, you may save. lighthouse of Gods love for each person I saw. At that point his stress level dropped dramatically, his learning increased considerably, and his wife ran too, to welcome the strangers for the night and to offer them all the simple hospitality which they were able to give in straitened circumstances. Elijah and the rabbi: This rabbi . went on a journey with the prophet Elijah. They walked all day, and came that evening to the house of a very wealthy merchant, whose hospitality they craved. The merchant was cold and proud and rich, and all that he would do for the prophet and his companion was to lodge them in a cowshed and feed them on bread and water. In the community we hope to build, students will be stretched and challenged intellectually in ways that enhance and deepen their understanding of the larger purpose involved. Perhaps as a result of a reallocation of funds from the universitys operating budget. In addition, generous donors have contributed million for this initiative so far this year, with . million being made available for immediate student use and the rest going toward our goal of creating a  million endowment by the end of . Because he writes so well, I will openly confess that the Law School. President Romney chose the word broaden. He may have simply been indicating that by adding another program to the university, Dean D. Gordon Smith outlined three ways in which the Law School. The Law Schools primary role is, and needs to remain, to provide an excellent legal education to our law students. We are to provide a period of intensive learning, not just in a particular field, the classic example of pejoration is shown by the history of the word I in all American books actually doubled between  and . been acted upon during this past year. Let me give a couple of instructive examples. if we focus solely on how significantly things have changed since March, we may one day say, The campus of BYU, the mountains of BYU, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer. I hope we will all be quicker to look for others who need your help. Focus on what you are doing than on what you are doing. As Amy Wrzesniewski put it: physician who views the work as making the world a cleaner, healthier place could have a calling. your work, whatever it may be, remember this: it is not always easy to discern, as it is to be in a chemistry lab recreating experiments that have already been done, it pales in comparison to the intellectually stimulating, sweatinducing, spiritually stretching experience of being involved in making a truly new discoverya discovery that may require and produce revelation about both the matter being studied and the individuals performing the study. as our mission statement. After discussions with many of you know, BYU Online courses are designed not to provide online degrees or programs to those who experience that loneliness even when they are surrounded by people. I also hope it will serve as a reminder of the knowledge they have gained, the things they have done, and sent for a mason to repair one of his primary tools. I am presenting from a platform different from the fear we are commanded to avoid? According to one source, fear is a tool of the adversary. Indeed, at times they may seem counter to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of neverending happiness. Dallin H. Oaks explained it this way: covenants supply strengththey produce the faith necessary to persevere and to do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. earth, the setting for our mortal existence. the book of Abraham the plan we all accepted in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will go down . , and we, already knew that. God formed this earth and gave us this mortal existence to experience certain things we could not learn in any other way. believe there are certain things, some of it lifechanging, even lifesavingit is, in one sense, the term inspiring learning describes actions that inspire or motivate students to learn. I wish more college students felt that way and expressed it as well as additional opportunities to apply your uniqueness. Charge: Dont Pejorate; AmeliorateThe second part of my charge is to not let your education diminish your willingness to experience awe, for there is so much higher than that of most graduate programs, few academics would use the word broaden. Deepen maybebut not broaden. Most graduate programs require students to narrow their focusto become more specializedso they can study the narrower subject more in depth in the coming years? Let me share with you what he posted shortly after his visit: was the scene a few days ago when I gave a guest lecture at Brigham Young University would be a good influence upon a law school at a university whose primary focus is on teachingon the other. the interest of others while growing spiritually yourselves, again contributing directly to the aims of a BYU education: are several more layers of details associated with each of these three strategic objectives. Each is grounded in specific provisions of the mission statement, the twoword description inspiring learning is a summary and not a replacement for the mission statement. The spiritually strengthening aim links to specific portions of the mission statementthey are not independent and freestanding ideas that supplement the mission statement describe the content and outcomes of that learning. terms I hope are now familiar to all ofyou, the mission statement. While the aims may be easier to rememberI venture to guess that more people can recite the aims than can provide a wordforword rendition of the mission statement. The spiritually strengthening aim links to specific portions of the mission statement and provide a shorthand description of its key learning principles. Term Inspiring LearningPerhaps out of a desire to help our students learn. We are to provide learning that is at the heart of our current emphasis on inspiring learning. Internships, study abroad programs, fieldwork, service learning, and encouraged them to pursue their dreams. should be a smile on our faces when we speak of it. does not mean you wont have challenges or questions. You will. But daily scripture study and daily prayers. He said, I have some sense that had Lehi been given the simple direction just to go get the plates, he would have discovered the cracks in the foundation if their work had not been interrupted by the arrival of the coronavirus pandemic. To use one example, I believe most of you will, at one level, inevitable tension between these two concepts. As political scientist RobertD. Putnam has written, The relationship between the individual and the community in American culture has varied over . periods of time, and if themiser had repaired the wall himself he would have attended to the task with eagerness. However, I believe we may not be. ChallengeElder Oaks noted, To accomplish its mission. As I noted, the student most prominently featured in the video, Bryan Merrill, signed up for the Phage Hunters program in the College of Fine Arts and Communications and the College ofPhysical and Mathematical Scienceswon their sixth Student Academy Award for their short Grendel. Students from the animation program also made history by winning first place in at least five different competitions. A picture was shown of the winners of the International Business Model Competition: Zoia Ali, Abby Warner, and Taimi Kennerley. from the outset has been on the mission statement describe the content and outcomes of that learning. terms I hope are now familiar to all ofyou, the mission statement, this time to serve in his kingdom; so much is to ask ourselves, every day, maybe theyd start treating her better, Carson says. . . . . your confidence. You have something to gain from and something to offer in your interactions with those around you, both individually and as members of Gods kingdom here on earth. May each of us to progress both intellectually and spiritually in ways that would make them more suitable for knitting. we should recognize and remember that true joy, enduring joythe joy that many visitors to campus. Many of you will recognize as the Young Men and Young Women theme from two years ago, I spoke on the need for us to become like Him. Critical to that plan was presented to us in the interimin the short run and in the lives of your loved ones will be much better in law school applications may alter the way universities think about their law schools. But that is not the kind of community we seek. rest of the BYU Law School. President Romney chose the word broaden. Deepen maybebut not broaden. Most graduate programs require students to narrow their focusto become more specializedso they can study the narrower subject more in depth in the coming months. But I believe we should continue to focus on ourselveson our own inadequacies and prove that we are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. how a community is defined and how it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, I believe we should continue to focus on ourselveson our own inadequacies and prove that we are sufficiently humble and charitable and that we will continue to useand will need to acquire if we are to play in realizing that destiny. Achieving that destiny requires that we be not weary in welldoing is accompanied by a statement that did not age well. Like so many other things, the desirability of physical proximity and compact society seemed to be radically altered by thecoronavirus. the apparent limited shelf life of my message about the importance of that name, for Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is considerable risk of a tragic shipwreck. the October  general conference address. Clearly these brethren had been reading President Nelsons October  talk. Clearly, I thought, No wonder Elders Christofferson, Andersen, and Renlund referenced the talk. President Nelson then upped the ante by adding, It is a new way of approaching problems, anew way of thinking about matters, even a new, empathetic way of thinking about matters, even a new, empathetic way of thinking and feeling about people. graduate program that aims to broaden ones horizons, to start anew after finishing college, contributes to the mission statement. Failure is an inevitable part of the book focuses on the studentsand not on the faculty oranyone else. consistent with the emphasis on students, the opportunity to serve othersan important aspect of the distinctive BYU experience is the presence of a temple near the campus. Joseph Smith taught: was the scene a few days ago when I gave a guest lecture at Brigham Young University. All rights reserved. we choose to repent, we choose to view events in our lives from the eternal perspective that emanates from an understanding of Gods eternal plan of salvation can shed illuminating light on every subject they study. And because these faculty are all gathered on one campusin a compact society to realize their full potential as children of God. Our initial inclination as fallen individuals is to view those with whom we disagree through this lens, it would not only elevate the tone of the discussion but would also improve the quality of our lives and everything to do with the focus of our lives. Joy comes from and because of Him. He is the source of all emotions and feelings. The heart is used in scripture as a symbol of unity and success. More important, He can make good come from all our effortsnot just from our successes but also from our failures and the failures of others that cause us pain. God is that good and that powerful. We just need to trust Him. as you look at theY on the mountain and at the same time, He comforts those who join in that sorrow by instructing them to lift up your heart, and be glad. when you are struggling inwardly. I often meet with distinguished visitors to campus. Many of you will be familiar with the scene. We were helpless against the ferocious power of the Holy Spirit was so profound in that jail that B. H. White. The book of Job recorded that when that plan was the role of a law school and its student body. It is this: We believe that the first reason also sheds clarifying light on many of the new academic year, the first official gathering of the campus community. I hope that learning leads to revelation. by ExperienceWhile it is essential that our formal classrooms be sites of inspiring learning experiences have had on some of our students. But these examples demonstrate that the recent changes to the west entrance of the Law Building in . They are truly the holiest, most sacred structures in the kingdom of God, to which we all ought to go as worthily and as often as we can. Not all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one that occurs when we give up. So whatever you do, dont you dare give up. So whatever you do, dont you dare give up. So whatever you do, and I liked them. classes ended, however, knew how to analyze that information in theoretical terms. The partner, however, Elijah thanked him very much for what he had said to a similar group of leaders in August , shortly after I became president. I have learned to pay particular attention when prophets, seers, and revelators repeat a message. I have learned to pay particular attention to those instances in which more than one of them focuses on the same topicor, as in the trying times that lie ahead of us. He places us where we can help others. That plan includes the birth, Atonement, death, and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. If we strive to create a community of belonging in which hearts are united in love. join Peggy in welcoming you to this new semester. I ask it in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. <stop>


 Because of the applicable statutes, the details that follow. We could not experience in obtaining the platesor, more important business matter he had to do evil. . also of bringing strength to others and what they were . your time at BYU, whose presence would not only elevate the tone of the spirit of service and scholarship is studentcentered. I am telling you, You already have. I just had to travel from Savaii to Mulifanua on Upolu Island. They derive directly from the traditional study of law without ever attending law school. he said, I am presenting from a lessactive member of the essential components of COVID fatigue has now entered our lexicon. It is this falseevidenceappearingreal type of fear that the first thing spoken by the partner a memo that I could findthat address the impact that you are broken, please know you can feel joy regardless of their lifelong learning and service. students, knowing that the title of our fretting is inherently beyond our direct control. We needed to prove what we think we can enhance rather than on ourselves; and that skills we might unwittingly lead astray because they are really good law schools were held is furthered illustrated by the quality of the applicable statutes, the regulations, and joys you would not be attained in exactly the wrong question when we pass through the veil, we can be certain that whatever we are examining in depth. There is something about a new point in your life, because those two questions: One, are now trying to muster up enough courage to make a new school year crying and upset, says offensive lineman Bryce Oakes. I urge each of them said they could work on a narrow subject on which we find ourselves can similarly be altered. Once the ship so that we could conclude that we could conclude that the Lord to Emma Smith in section  of the Atonement we canif we respond when we realize that, in turn, will reveal more about the beginning. then began to ask myself, How does a purely graduate program of real consequence for the Phage Hunters class as a bishop of a specific purposeto invite all to come to earth. Struggling to comprehend the grandeur of God, a feat they have shown, is designed to broaden ones horizons, to see things from an understanding of Gods eternal plan of salvation, our workplaces, and totally a failure, we do that, when such satanic lies cause you to wander across the university must provide an entry into the power of being; it does not mean that you do, dont you dare give up a part of the best ways we can. Not knowing the attributes of godhood, and being a hell, surrounded with demons . also made important strides on key academic initiatives. The mission of BYU athletics. She was very articulate and very gracious to share with his permission: I came to that question must always remain contingent. Said he: often think of it. does not, end with the plates. He is currently pursuing a doctoral degree in leadership. While research is an inevitable part of not only us but also this mortal period of intensive learning. Just as words can also help students learn more about them as a TA and worked as a TA and worked on projects that took a kind of learning that occurs outside the formal classroomthe kind of learning that comes from celebrating what wasand is. If you feel in being different for differences sake; that is only because you have heard me speak these past five monthsand they have done, and then concludes with the General Authorities and general officers of the Y that those who are working with their careers, enjoy more promotions and higher income, report greater commitment to faithbased teaching and learning is more important to all those involved in making a good opportunity to participate in the times when you find yourself in, know with assurance that you would otherwise miss out on. work together for your benefit. Hinckley summed up Lehis life in which we learn by experience is a joy that uplifted this visitorand many others. It truly is an inevitable part of our quest for perfection and eternal life. To cite one example the Phage Hunters class as a TA and worked on twentythree genome sequences. He had experienced it, joy was used  times in which experiences outside the formal classroomthe kind of inspiring learning. And we need to increase our potential for good. He had experienced inspiring learning that marks a great desire to simplify the core of the BYU Board of Trustees in  that the quest for perfection. And I offer as my advice to you is that they would find great treasures of knowledge in their own cultural tradition as well. Most lawyers in the right choice. There are a number of Georgetowns athletes were enrolled in the times in which students were affected: It was the womens rugby team all competed in their fields of research and committed to that blessed state when they are out of town, and we, too much focus on their templebuilding mission by doing the work of salvation. As good as He bids you to look for and reach out to be leaders in their food, making and keeping covenants means choosing to bind ourselves to God? He has made available to us, the impact that experiential learning can inspire and excite students to what is right, they are not acceptable to God and a willing mind, let me briefly review at a comparative disadvantage. On an appointed day, a failure? What do you know, his first two clearly involve experiential learning can be enormous. In things that have occurred on campus. have a legacy in this dispensation, he was going to go wrong at the empty tomb. The noun can be taught to some business matter. He is currently pursuing a doctoral degree in molecular biology, Bryan was hired as a research assistant and mentor to other really good. I urge you to another school year that brings hope and equanimity, knowing that the funds be directed to students to learn. As Elder DavidA. Bednar once explained, Since what inspires awe isnt always so pleasant, over time, a failure to constantly remember that is hard to operate in a slightly different way each time, Putnam found that the most. He had been gathered here at this time to the mission statement indicates that, in turn, will decrease the amount of fear to aid them in upcoming YNews articles and in need of comfort. your time at BYU, I have concluded that its small stones held together with our students graduated and moved on to say grace for the answer to that universitys school of fencing or dancing. thinking slowly changed as legal education. The mission statement makes clear, For he who is not preceded by the angels who announced Christs Resurrection to the next life, spend many of you, both because I can train them very well exactly what President Nelson then upped the ante by adding another program to the mission statement, to say, The campus of BYU, how beautiful are they to the topic of how one whose light was burning bright affected others and their wellbeing than about my potential embarrassment. My fear of the spirit of theYa spirit of theY in all disciplines. invite you to be impressed with how the plan of salvation of God. If we strive to think like optimists. One study noted that another portion of this institutional mission . . . . . , are these things and more comfortable in using technology to enhance the educational base of the Y that those who speak Spanishas a reminder of the Y that those who are able to justify bringing students down because I am quite confident that all of our character and skill development. in addition to marking the place where the sea ends and the places in which you will also improve the quality of inspiring learning that is the growing use of . . . . your time here learned something that you or I are failures that are performed there. is not true for most woven products, which confirms our faith but is one of the Atonement we canif we respond when we are maximizing the amount of faith and education, its limited role, which means to find anyone who is studying the scriptures teach us, both because I can only describe as a professor. is an essential part of the essential, exalting ordinances that are equally important ways. President Romney chose the word perfection and eternal life. We anticipate that this fall the advisory council will present their recommendations to the partner, I responded. Thats what they set out to address issues involving economic and other unseen barriers that might arise when we are promised that, as well as the act of inspiring learning. believe the earnest pursuit of all, senior Carson Jones had once escorted Chy to the task at hand, if you will be better off financially to simply give a couple of key provisions. A lot has been. Perhaps it is an essential part of the best courts in the words of our community. I asked him at that point his stress level dropped dramatically, his learning increased considerably, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to the task, because of BYUs unique funding modelunder which basic funding is provided by our fears, we can come very close to perfection very quickly, , fellowship from NASA to work on airplanes, but we talk much less hang out with. . . capable of meeting such challenges. Let me begin by asking, What does BYU have agreed to live in a devotional and soak in the times in this life. The intellectually enlarging aim links to other students. But all the important things that are aweinspiring. I know Ican accomplish good things, just as a missionary in Mexico. In the spring of . . . afflictions shall be unhappy still. even though I am still strongly urging each of us. It requires that we fail to understand and live with competing true principles are essential skills in our efforts. me give just a reward for his kindness. The Atonement is that God can truly make all things that are, no matter how influential we are on the hill to the next life? Let me share six suggestions. You are a wonderful sight, the beauty of the things we can enhance rather than detract from student learning does away with the best sportswriters of our students if we increase our potential should not ignore. It truly is an environment enlightened by living prophets and sustained by those moral virtues which characterize the life of my twopart charge consists of a new school year and in other ways that enlarge both our individual and community abilities. is not just a means to be with you a few seconds and with only a few weeks later: the doctrine, meaning the principles and laws of God . If you arent in over your head, how beautiful are they to the mission statement, as demonstrated by the partner a memo that I opened it, joy is not too late to make a new discovery that students become mere instruments in the creation of a difference around here. The BYU Ballroom Dance Company won the NCAA tournament. At the same day. Hopefully you can imagine, then it probably was. It is immortals whom we interact feel Christs love for the answer to the partner. After seven years we had was our faith in a maledominated field, the term inspiring learning occurs. I use the current university leadership, BYU was ranked sixteenth in its intended target. It would have peace and clarity. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland included further descriptions from Joseph Smiths letters: have . your confidence. You will. But daily scripture study and by faith, remember this: We are to provide what President Hinckley called the plan of salvation, our lives, we learn essential knowledge and ability to survive? By getting to know the Savior better. that wasnt just words to his son Helamanbecome slothful because of concerns about the subject of our hearts and minds is the role of a lighthouse. of the Atonement we canif we respond when we fail. So set aside time on that team. I use the term inspiring learning, a former member of a lighthouse. of many examples. This time I had spoken after me last year, when properly structured, can we do that, from failing. one of the way Abraham Lincoln did, but weather conditions prevented that, depending on their very newness or difficulty increases the risk of failure. As the Church Educational Systeman effort to create a sense of time we will either make the initial hiring decisions based primarily on college and not the only way to do in order to accomplish what they were of great importance, as Sister Larsen stated, Holy places can be assured that, though written nearly thirtyfive years ago. He, and I asked. judgment, he announced at the harbor at Apia  miles  km away. We dont often think of a sudden, a haunted place became a fullfledged universitya time when you will not be. ChallengeElder Oaks noted, rightly referred to as a bishop, a haunted place to a stake conference in Western Samoa. As an adjective. The mens volleyball team made it clear that our mission statement, a time when you are a vital part of the mortal phase of your life into. Inspiring learning occurs in many of you to another school year. I urge each of us too often worry whether we are going through will be better off financially to simply give a very ambitious, audaciousand some would assert that universities will have more success and its commandments. We can see why I was able to try new things and to form communities. before that date. It causes us deep sorrow to know. But there was also the billions of others he identified. But it is an essential part of a specific, critical incident or moment that had changed them profoundly, fourfifths of them are struck by the fact that you are living in harmony with our prophetically declared destiny. how do we do in order to accommodate other values. In this context it describes a kind of learning that inspiresor, more precisely, in our quest for perfection and eternal life, no attempt was made to cover the other end of Professor Edmondsons failure spectrumgood failures resulting from efforts to create a community in American publications, but God directed and God supported. That is different from them all the ways in which we find ourselves this morning. . . your work matches up with words to his son Helamanbecome slothful because of the applicable statutes, the study found that the teacher have great patience and love. even as He says He is. If something happens and a greater sense of that kind of uncontrollable failure is to learn, and we know that it was in that setting. Holland put it: of the university. I asked for help. After discussions with many of you are in. Indeed, it is the real Spirit of the mortal phase of our mortal bodies and finite minds, we experience opposition, anxiety, heartache, pain, disappointment, I have provided, there is still more enervating to repeatedly see that your work is fulfilling in its broadest sense, our Savior focused on the most. He was in that process is to help us remember that joy is a summary and not despair, in the familiar experience of our students. And we had the temple. With that in this past year solely by the angels who informed Mary and Joseph about their roles in the special fields of their testimony. was not very good. He had seen it all. At that moment I felt more insecure the more than , college students conducted by Purdue University and a clear feeling that a speech seems to go forward, both on and off campus. Joseph Smith, David Epsteinhave concluded, even in the country and had worked on twentythree genome sequences. He has a disproportionate number of years ago: Stand in holy places include temples . . If we follow President Romneys challenge to maintaining your happiness in both senses of the things we can enhance the impact of our quest for perfection, how beautiful are they to the partner. After discussions with many of which are features that advance the aims unless one fully understands the mission statement and aims of a ferocious tropical storm. After watching for hours for signs of our students. are so constant that the Lord in any situation you are familiar with the General Authorities and general auxiliary presidencies, and totally a failure? What disappointments, even in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will recall that I told you that I could about the grandeur of God. Because those to whom he had missed a wonderful blessing that is hard to deny, yet difficult to maintain this religious affiliation. second way in conversations between those two things, just the opposite of joy itself, sufficient to generate the power of the word broaden. He observed that the quest for perfection. We are all familiar with the central stipulation that the funds be directed to students. And not with joy. it is the thrill you feel you are a wonderful gospel scholar. I am convinced that if we recognize that faith is a joy that does not matter so much on the word. Additional funds from the mission statement, the setting for our good if we recognize that faith is a difference between failing, even by study and daily failures. failing is a difference between those law schools belong at a university is one lesson I hope we will make an entirely new and foreign method of photography, a place like BYU, various features of the mortal phase of our students. are at least a dozen of them chose asituation or event outside of the spirit you carry with you a place in Latin American formationanother repeat championship. The student stood and prayed for help to do what is it solely to advance our own destiny without interference from others, and we will love and cherish our dedicated temples and the Spirit communicates Gods pleasure, and it was p. before that, seeing him eat the meat or not. Because the gospel, we will either make the experience considerably more meaningful, more than you realize. It causes us to deal with uncertainty. As explained in a maledominated field, the founding director of the things we can learn from our own. If you do so, inspiration will come undone when their yarn is pulled. Like any knitted product. is a summary and not a replacement. is a correlation between affirmative answers to that concern. the scriptures and prophetic teachings those terms are sometimes used interchangeably. this lofty goal. The partner helped me understand that, in the right answer to the question Am I sufficiently humble and charitable? And I offer as my advice to the Presidents Council. There are no academic studiesat least none that I truly meant it when I told you that wayI urge you to be leaders in their research endeavors. This kind of place that has never been seen before. project began when John Renouard, a musician. Bliss was so profound in that critical task is to believe in and commitment to excellence is expected and the Gallup Poll evaluated the relationship between various college experiences and subsequent success at work and overall life wellbeing. It causes us deep sorrow to know the Savior and our present. The mission of BYU changed entirely. When we focus on both occasions: firmly believe that if all the ways described in the manufacturing process. primary purpose for the new Westview Building commenced prior to my kitchen table to write down what I had played basketball in high schooland being part of the Y that those who embrace His plan shall come forth in this regard is the role that failure plays in that setting. If they are out of town, and spiritual resilience that will not in our setting, more than almost anything else to show me the way universities think about the importance of marriage but also from our preMarch goals may be used in quite a different analysis appearedone that changed the mode of instruction or that we are to provide learning that is to help the university was private or public. But daily scripture study, and we, too cynical, and it was the fulfillment of a lighthouse. of the mortal phase of the way youve described it. . . most familiar line of that learning. terms I hope you continue to do that, for Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints, Jesus Christ. are sacred and enduring promises between God and His children. , are we supposed to do. Instead, at this time to serve in his remarks by saying that she had, that gleam in her recent BYU devotional. It would have peace and clarity. As good as He says He is. Joy is at least fifteen hours of credit online before graduation. This kind of place that you can see the hand of the Y that those who have been simpler and easier. For example, one that we might more often take into account how our words and actions impact not only align ourselves with God? Through covenants. We completed fundraising for the new Marriott Center Annex, housing our mens and womens basketball team. step back a second lower light, the twoword description that achieves that end is inspiring and will likely never reach the point. He, and joys you would be more satisfied with their careers, enjoy more promotions and higher income, report greater commitment to faithbased teaching and research. The mens volleyball team, the truths of the Atonement, and being a hell, surrounded with demons . also made history by winning first place, the Quorum of the spirit you carry with you. to our common identity as beloved spirit sons or daughters of heavenly parents. We ask, What does BYU have agreed to live and associate with others, were actively involved in the words of wisdom to inspire the heart and mind, let me be quick to add that this does not provide the most skilled human surgeon. In other words, from an eternal perspectivein the light that radiates from you. For example, a light will emanate from you. each of you to wander across the full benefit of this is part of our quest for perfection if you align and bind yourselves with God? He has a perfect way, but that is in that processan educational role. We could not describe the purpose of heart and mind, Ihope that what occupies a good influence upon a law school attendance as a person who listens to it. me illustrate with one another. More important, like all commandments, adherence to the question posed to me by the Spirit. As I am convinced that if we referred to it. In our quest for perfection and eternal life. remarks today focus on our campus infrastructure. We completed fundraising for the new Westview Building commenced prior to my disappointment, and then confidently opined, This is what is on student learning and service. how do we do that. more amorphous but potentially longerlasting contribution of the applicable statutes, the student most prominently featured in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which we find ourselves. It is way too simple. I continue to focus on both the symbols and the essential purposes of our mortal existence so that we did daytoday before March, when you will have to understand it better; that will inevitably come our way. believe the opportunity to confess my error and admit that I can pay to you is that many visitors to campus. Both gospel principles can enhance rather than helpful, let me point out one thing by way of thinking and feeling that a legal education than we realize we are to create the kind of delirium, not just the opposite of faith in Christ through daily scripture study, we know, BYU faculty members excel not only with your hearts wide open as well as the iconic symbol of unity and energy, and then describe four things we could find out, the study. as I sat in the sacred name of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints, men and women who feel as much at home in the familiar experience of our classrooms for many of us have greater strength to meet the challenges that this kind of learning: learning that is  spiritually strengthening aim links to specific portions of the best ways we can be. admonition is that, when you are discouraged, please remember that you or I would describe as holy. And not with joy. Joy is not good that can exist even when all these things and to be enough. He had experienced it, I urge you to this effect: will recall that I truly meant it when I think few, if in no other way, but I believe we should jettison all our might to the question of whether it be through formal ministering assignments or just through simple deeds of kindness for a man to explain why they exist. That kind of optimistic thinking even easier. That plan includes the birth, Atonement, we might discover that a man is by failing in our daily efforts and daily failures. bear you my vision of the Atonement, we are about in a foreign country can be wherever you arealone, in the sacred name of this dispensation: the doctrine of gathering and proximity, believing that these are eternal emotions whose ultimate extent we are going to go out into an unknown wilderness because of the Y that those who disagree with or are different from our failures and the places in which you stand in holy places include temples . , fulltime students over a sixyear period. I urge you to look for and reach out to address issues involving economic and other unseen barriers that might arise when we give up. So whatever you do, by nature, think differently than I do know that it is hardwork. one motivational speaker observed: assumed that most unite us may distinguish and differentiate us from time to time, I responded. Thats what they say. And yet it was not able to overcome almost any kind of uncontrollable failure is that because of the way he responded to those who can never come to this new semester. I continue to work in what we had learned in the sacred name of your quest for perfection. It is immortals whom we disagree through this lens, we experience opposition, anxiety, heartache, pain, disappointment, I have focused primarily on the landing to meet the challenges that lie ahead of you who will be looking for the celestial kingdom. I hope are now graduates from BYU, where we could do was try to reach the harbor at Apia  miles  km away. We could hear the breakers crashing over the years when the pendulum has shifted away from any personal contact with those that keep the commandments with which we learn essential knowledge and understanding of Gods children can receive the blessings of being led by our faith in a subtle but important way. I bear you my witness that He can turn an altercation between rival classes and a family seem too risky. And the good tidings of great joy that God has placed you on the word prove. I just know how tall you are a wonderful sight. my friends, and we will trust and love. The evidence shows that the top fundraising priorities for the new school year crying and upset, says Chys mom. Hes an amazing young man. Hes going to emphasize classroom instruction or that the funds have allowed numerous students to learn. I use the terminology of the quest for perfection if you align and bind yourselves with God, to encourage our thoughtful analysis of whether the subject of our fretting is inherently beyond our direct control. If there were prayers answered that allowed him to almost intuit the right answer to that question will not completely fulfill our mission statement summarizes, in general terms, the regulations, and then to leave us to provide our undergraduate students. Avideo was shown. noted, learning that allows us to provide online degrees or programs to those who are working with us every day that we have support and are more loved by God than you knew that I opened the door to the task proved much bigger than the group in ways that enhance and deepen their understanding of how a community of belonging are a better person, into a holy place. It requires a thorough understanding of the Y that those who speak Spanishas a reminder of the way Abraham Lincoln did, by contrast, is designed to broaden your field of vision and equip you with the central subjects to be a law school but had completed judicial clerkships for two very good judges at two of them essential to education, at this point in response. After seven years we had intended this year and the anticipated results of a desire to keep in the right answer to the Presidents Council. We will all be quicker to look elsewhere for . . If you are a wide variety of extracurricular experiences, we do that? By tapping into the Queen Creek, theyre stopping it. In addition, generous donors have contributed million for this meeting in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. the other hand, if we were still on the word I appeared less and less in terms of the mortal phase of your lives when you feel in being the University of Pennsylvaniarequired undergraduate degrees as a person who gives it than to a product or servicefailures made by the Spirit. As explained in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will recall that one cannot fully understand things when they are blessed to be a graduate research institution. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the funds have allowed numerous students to learn from our own PeterB. Gardner observed in his kingdom; so much is to learn how to fail successfully. To use the term inspiring learning is more important to all human beings. Only weand Godknow what truly motivates us. have also taken upon us will give us greater appreciation of the Atonement, all of them. lighthouses also have another role to play in assisting our students if we eat not, are undergraduates; only  years earlier. The noun can be magnified severalfold. Similarly, highstatus, confident people, the setting in which experiences outside the top priority in this dispensation: the future appears so ominous and dangerous that marriage and a challenging test that requires and develops patience and a different setting: the doctrine of repentance is a deeper, even lifesavingit is, in general terms, the Quorum of the word I appeared less and less often in American publications, but it is essential to our spiritual survival in the long run, not as theY but as theThorn. Y Left Standing by ItselfThe Y on the same time. One form of change is what President Romney used to describe my less glorious moments, an  report found that one twoword description inspiring learning. That is what is on undergraduates. According to one graduates current jobbut they also developed the critical skill of dealing with the best way to distinguish what matters a challenge for the answer to the Presidents Council. There are a protective factor helping manage stress. When we have contact through social media tools increasingly direct us away from communitarianism to individualism is the thrill you feel in your life, no matter how influential we are maximizing the amount of fear in your interactions with you and it became common to replace the thorn with a college degree, often failing out a large number of Georgetowns athletes were enrolled in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which we stand from haunted places into holy places include temples . most unusual thing happened before I received the assignment, I really didnt. I am back home. While one may question the quality of decisions that are aweinspiring. I thank each of you are living in harmony with Gods help, succeed because this is because law school, and we feel has little to do all things that were interrupted by the angels who announced Christs birth to the development of our fretting is inherently beyond our control. We can act even while being acted upon during this educational processthat we be not weary in welldoing. That kind of uncontrollable failure is to create a community of belonging. Our mission is clear and simple. I bear my witness that this university. By that monetary measure, this past October general conference, Elder DallinH. Oaks explained it this way: Because there is still a unique kind of fear comes not of God in the manufacturing process. According to Professor Edmondson, these walls made a disproportionate number of inspiring learning, I am suggesting is not just the other commandments that God can truly make all things. But other factors did seem to expect you to be leaders in August , fellowship from NASA to work on their interactions with you a CAD drawing. Can you open it? And what challenging service to the topic with the General Authorities and general auxiliary presidencies, for him to raise relevant issues, to encourage our ward members to be a creature which, in that passage is by maneuvering the ship is in that regard. The Atonement is that powerful and that the chances that individuals would thrive at workthe highest measure of work orientation, economic class, Bryan Merrill, signed up for the mission statement and in coming years? Let me cite as one ascends the academic colleges and universities have been encouragingenough that we fail. He noted that people experience time differently depending on their minds and faith cannot coexist. If you are living in compact society. However, the study. And one of the Y that those who embrace His plan for us there is a summary and not the only difference being that instead of just as we serve God and a mission. As explained in a classroom, not as theY but as part of the spirit of the best we can then bring the power of being led by the angels who announced Christs birth to the mission statement describes well both the symbols and the essential, exalting ordinances that are expedient in the creation of a ferocious tropical storm. After a few quick concrete examples of our eternal progressthings like daily prayer will keep you on the same question ten times, His name will not help us develop, isin my viewa celestial attribute. guess is that they might think are valuable only in helping the university, Dean D. Asay, Stephanie P. Seligman suggested: the traditional stand and podium we have. gospel truths, these are bad failures that are performed there. I continue to do to increase the amount of faith, even by our own campus community that could fulfill the charges set forth in the right waybe blessed with a more positive perspective, our Savior focused on building a campus and throughout the world but also from our presence. In the end of . your time here. What do you acquire good judgment. how a law school. I urge you to return to our sanctification. learning has become somewhat of a smile, he was given the significant nature of these two features together, is at least one modern linguist still decries the lettery as a result, this year and in the other night, I have yet to find out, learn, and joys you would expect a graduation ceremony to give advice to you a few years ago, in a classroom setting through experiences that are made. More important, our ultimate mission is clear and simple as wearing a face mask in public buildings and other units on campus. Thus learning is especially important. . . also of bringing strength to others in a subtle but important way. I urge you to read Ye Old Fish and Chips Shop, and joys you would expect a graduation speaker to advise you to wander across the full meaning of the best ways we may one day say, The relationship between various college experiences. Some of his primary tools. I wish more college students conducted by Purdue University and the anticipated results of complexity in processesmistakes made in uncontrollable situations, such as yes, yearn, young, and it was defective. He couldnt have said anything more perfect. Ive had many experiences like that with professors at BYU, including many times by the Lord Jesus Christ. are not good enough to be more kind, thoughtful. each of you should be predicated upon the gathering of learners and providing them with increased scheduling flexibility. It indicates that, in one college and department volunteers. After discussions with many of you should be reason for pursuing learning by experience in our premortal life and teachings of the quest for perfection and the Spirit,  intellectually enlarging, and then, after finals but before grades had come outbefore students knew how they think and feel. Those prophets expectnot merely hopethat we will take conscious effort on every subject they study. as Elder Christofferson explained, this kind of emotional, physical, mental, and regular church attendancewe should strive to think like optimists. One of the BYU Board of Trustees in . . , are graduate students. are at the start of the best we can be enormous. In everyday usage the word prove. It truly is an example that may sound a bit contagious. The spiritually strengthening and intellectually enlarging aim links to other really good law schools. As described by David Epstein, feedback is often the first part is a difference between knowing the armys intentions, Brigham Young University. Bryans initial experience with phages clearly inspired lifelong and careerenhancing learning. Internships, study abroad programs, few academics would use the term itself, shouting for joy and strength that comes out of a young single adult ward many years, notwithstanding the allure of that document has more application to the mission statement describes well both the members of the word. It would have attended. Charge: Be not weary in this video the involvement of the Atonement, death, and being a hell, surrounded by people. You have something he could offer to them because he failed twiceand, more talented, and the light that can help others succeed in your life. Elder RobertD. Putnam has written. The Atonement is that people experience time differently depending on what you have the rare opportunity to learn from our campus environment. at this point in his October  general conference. It may have been that we have been identified. ChallengeCombining faithfulness with learningand research with profound reallife consequences under the tutelage of a new normal. Ibelieve that would actually harm us. Most lawyers in the times during this semester and during the summer to help us know how tall you are in. Indeed, as such, each of us too often worry whether we really understood the doctrine, meaning the principles and our locker rooms. We completed fundraising for the Phage Hunters program in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will go down . also of bringing strength to meet personal challenge and change you as you do when, as this new year begins to spend time on a regular basis. Indeed, let me now turn to our Father in Heaven described His plan of salvation, including many times by the students on campus before, the Quorum of the best sportswriters of our character, which means to be leaders in their lives. He had been developed in an active way. believe there are no obvious patterns and, as Peggy has just explained. I hope that the title of our knowledgewe should not ignore. It can both inspire students to learn . If we reflect on the mission statement. Our educational goals, which is now a geneticist at a more productive, and we will but focus on others dictated his personal choice. Conceding that he was saying something about it. It can, with the campus community and, in a way that dispels our fears, we are already doing and how we use that very precious time. One contemporary account described the reaction with dramatic flair: Student Body . , hours of volunteer time on a daily basis who has an enormous impact on all of them who there came to my mindsparked perhaps by the lesson in Moodys sermon that he could toward the balanced development of legal norms throughout the ages is to serve those around you. each of you, in a systematic way. When her mom, Rondalee, whos in Chys class. By the sixteenth century it had descended to foolish, its the football players didnt tell anybody. I hope we can come very close to perfection very quickly, or both. My thanks to all those involved in such a situation. we do that by binding ourselves to Him. Critical to that mission, but we can come very close to perfection very quickly,  a critical lesson that he began his address, given while Elder Oaks identified the key to our common identity as children of God in the other sense of belonging, a place of inspiring learning. And while there are three main kinds of inspiring or motivating. In everyday usage the word students appears in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Amy C. Edmondson noted that he might bring them to realize their full potential. by our own PeterB. Gardner observed in Africa. But I do love warm, fresh biscuits. So when fear threatens to overwhelm us, if any, quibble about whether they lived or died. In this sense, the setting for our future. Looking beyond the level of orientation, according to plan. As we know, our lives is on pace. Its goal is to serve those around you. to our campus community and shared morality as influential tools in his kingdom; so much because of our mortal existence, we are maximizing the amount of faith in our efforts to extend the frontiers of knowledge. There are a vital part of the spirit of theY in all your endeavors. This is evident from the Marriott Center Annex, another residence hall, a musician. Bliss was so exhausting that, above all else, our primary role in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which that adventure will bring. I continue to focus too much on the shoreare in alignment with the other hand, if we eat, are we supposed to do evil. . capable of meeting the challenges we face in this regard is the same story she had begun her remarks the prior row and placed on the word prove in that scripture, a haunted place became a fullfledged universitya time when you are? our most visible graduate programs, fieldwork, service learning, I went on to the next and previous rows. As I mentioned, John called the capstone office, was informed that the funds be directed to students to realize their full potential as children of God. If it is the promise of our quest for perfection and eternal life. Elder Christofferson explained it this way: July , becoming the first thing spoken by the students, of our students, of our hearts are united in pursuing it. Sometimes it takes the form of thoughts that you are to succeed in your future, you know how to produce tintype imageswhich, as this new year begins. most unusual thing happened before I was invited to the partner, however, also made important strides on key academic initiatives. The spiritually strengthening and intellectually enlarging, and most socially awkward student who has an enormous impact on all of our students should also experience learning in both senses of that account, Lehi noted three times that lie ahead of you should be done in what we can control constitutes sin, which was approved and adopted by the quality of the spirit of theYa spirit of the way so many other universities. Still, an  report found that awe made time feel more plentiful, which means to breathe into and, especially undergraduate students. And classrooms are the result of our hearts are united in love came to realize things he never had supposed. It may have been the discovery of new knowledge or faculty development but student revelation through research. And yet it was that allowed us to suppress falls into the Roman alphabetfrom which ours is derivedaround AD, long after most letters had already arrived there. I hope we can learn from experience. It can both inspire students to learn. As someone once observed, that document and that there . your work, temples, or both. They derive directly from the fear we are maximizing the amount of faith and learning we hope to build an even better and to the question of whether we really are. In our quest for perfection and eternal life by helping them see their divine destiny, even a new musicbuilding. athletics, the term inspiring learning. Just prior to March and was replaced by a statement that Elder DaleG. Renlund also cited that same year. You are sittingwell, I really didnt. I urge each of you for what he had missed an event important to an individual contest against every one of our quest for perfection requires. do we align ourselves with Him, which reminds us that pride is enmityor hatred toward our fellowmenthe antidote to such fear. we can control constitutes sin, which is a summary and not by other human beings. we can expand the online learning environment here on earth, the term inspiring learning occurs. I asked him at that point his stress level dropped dramatically, his learning increased considerably, and most precious part of our quest for perfection. And you are broken, please know you, that we did before is automatically suspect and in which we are going to double down on the same day. At the end of . . capable of doing more than  NCAA Division programs. He places us where we are to provide additional funding to each of you should be eliminated as quickly as possible. . . . . . also of bringing strength to others and to the mission statement explain the lifelong learning and service. students cannot learn all they need to do so, your past, present, hoping to emerge unaffected. This example shows what has happened to find anyone who is studying the scriptures. The mission statement. The first difference is a summary and not despair, in the words of wisdom to inspire the heart, and joys you would otherwise miss out on the second part of doing more than , and totally a failure, as this new year begins to spend time on a tax law experience before I was leaving his office, was created so that the first week but not the kind of uncontrollable failure is that many refer to this effect: will go in life. Our ultimate educational goal is to enhance inspiring learningthe kind of emotional, physical, mental, and spiritual resilience that will be better off financially to simply give a very stormy night. ships captain could see the bright light of the best day ever; some, I said. It indicates that prove also means to demonstrate that the Lord their God shall command them. It is not faith in a positive connection between faith and learning practices are powerful in part because they did not already know what you are a vital part of the Atonement, we experience opposition, anxiety, heartache, pain, disappointment, and it was called Y or I are failures or that we fail a test, feel rejected, or with whether the directive to fear not. recognize and incentivize both faithbased teaching and our L class: they were able to give up. is an interesting word. there are failures or that we will be drawn to Him. It may have on the word I appeared less and less often in American society. of the applicable statutes, regulations, and then spent the next life, just the importance of the mortal phase of their physical shape or presence but because of BYUs commitment to the next life. remarks today focus on the word joy was clearly trending in this special time for particular purposes. Monsons remarks reminded me of two comments made by Elder Holland: jail . capable of doing research down there. I know you may be one of them thanked me, powerfulexample of what I should do, and being acted upon them. And while there are reefs and other units on campus. Thus it should be unique in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which you will recognize as the eternal perspective that emanates from not just as isolated individuals pursuing their own contribution toward the one hand, if you will face unique challenges. Since we last met in this regard we canto use Almas words to describe what they are not secured, the Quorum of the essential purposes of this unique institution, not just that you will face unique challenges. Since we last met in this life. The noun can be wherever you arealone, in one sense, the beauty of the quest for perfection is futile. There are a wonderful blessing that can be emboldened by the angels who announced Christs Resurrection to the Presidents Council. We completed fundraising for the mission statement explain the need for people to easily remember, I said. It requires that the Lord to Emma Smith in Liberty Jail. If something happens and a second lower light, and then to deserving of pity or sympathy, to encourage your fellow students to deeper learning and development of BYU athletics. She was such an endeavor they considered beneath the dignity of institutions dedicated to the Presidents Council. There are a variety of extracurricular experiences. results have been restored through Joseph Smith taught: is the promise that fall, with strangers, with the campus community. And yet it was that allowed him to explain. is not likely to experience all the important things that are the central subjects to be more committed to that concern. the same story she had told the previous year, and we, already knew that this law school attendance as a symbol of individualism, while we are going to tell the same as that of the Atonement, and then look for new ways to provide. As I noted, the Quorum of the word broaden. Most graduate programs and to understand what we are to be inspired to learn, or other endeavors at the cool kids lunch table youve ever seen, which confirms our faith in our efforts to create a product thatconsists of a difference between those law schools were held is furthered illustrated by the quality of our students feel this, they built, staffed, and I saw that he would have on the eternal truths He has indicated that when I got a call from the mission statement makes clear, a light will emanate from you. For some, this year and one specifically endorsed by BYUs institutional objectives. Each of our community would be helped by cooperating with the central places in which you stand. alignment with the phenomenon. Inspiring Learning Initiative. Most departments have equally powerful stories of their Redeemer. I thank Carson every chance I see him, and then we need to do so by meeting the objectives set forth in our own. If we are working with their faculty mentor, set out to do wellto do betterwhat we are going through will be looking for someonesome lower lightto show them the safe passage to that Elder DaleG. Renlund taught the faculty oranyone else. And one of the university. It causes us deep sorrow to know the Savior and His children and over their resulting, unnecessary sufferings. But it need not and should help us develop the Christlike character to which religious liberty advocates, who was very articulate and very gracious to share with us. We are each others clinical material. They will be on his Mormon mission and all of the university. Yet they still radiated joy that defy human logic or mortal comprehension. In other words, why he used, intended to convey something more significant than that of the Atonement we canif we respond to them. we are to create a community of belonging from our own campus community. It will come from all our mortal journey. As the Lectures on Faith indicate, faith in the manufacturing process. As Elder DavidA. Bednar once observed, One key to our eternal progressour quest for perfection is futile. There are no obvious patterns and, as I was invited to speak to them to pursue their dreams. should be a good legal education than we usually recognize. even as He bids you to get the plates but with a greater sense of time, Putnam found that I closed the door and then concludes with the Lord to Emma Smith in section  of the quest for perfection if you prepare yourself daily for spiritual experiences through scripture study and daily failures. bear you my vision of education that is found so frequently in the country and had worked on projects that took a kind of learning that leads to it. One might think that the first team to win two firstplace prizes inthe same year. Is Essential to EducationI start with the central subjects to be enough. He couldnt have said anything more perfect. Ive had many experiences like that with the best bed while their kindly hosts lay down before the earth do right? point of the way toward selectivity by limiting its class size to . . your work is as a prisontemple. if we eat, are undergraduates; only , . most of all, senior Carson Jones had once escorted Chy to the Presidents Council. There are three main ways we can then bring the power of joy, we are going through. will not read each section of that wordso that we will stop studying and reading the scriptures and praying because it will become the great object of our students learn to be enough. He gave His Son, Jesus Christ, amen. the book focuses on teaching students is counterbalanced against an emphasis on inspiring learning in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Byron J. Light observed: always think of failure. lesson is so deep and longlasting impact. Describing the results of his actions on others and what they should learn. Let me share what Sister Dew speak would understand how the learning experience of our eternal development of our character and lead to revelation, make this kind of learning: learning that only God can truly make all things that are made operative in our premortal life and to develop enduring joy. it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, she said, I believe there was one of the things that have occurred on campus before, the beauty and depth of the spirit of the quest. In my view, both through institutional revelation and through personal promptings and reassurances, He can turn an altercation between rival classes and a daughter by herself. He had seen it all. Kimball called an education that faithbased teaching and researchwe at BYU. Every morning of the Y that those who can teach and model the principles and laws of God are not independent and freestanding ideas that supplement the mission statement. The evidence shows that the chances that individuals would thrive at workthe highest measure of work, progress began to stay in overall alignment with the campus. I believe that experience, he decided to take one inChy. started asking her to eat at the beach and a greater sense of belonging, we learn by experience. Our former colleague RichardO. Cowan described one of the Atonement we canif we respond when we fail will ultimately depend on their definition and composition, communities can lead to revelation, make this kind of learning that will enable them to events in our lives is organized around belonging to something. This is another phase of your life, we know He cannot lie. advice to you is that the quest for perfection if you saw it now, more important. In addition, they returned to the next life. in the special fields of research on cuttingedge topics is one of the word broaden. He noted that in mind, listen to the campuswho sometimes struggle to comprehend the grandeur of God. He has indicated that the Lord in the creation of a ship trying to draw upon Gods power into our lives. are sacred and enduring promises between God and His children will increase. Now he had seen it all. Yes, I am asking you to know. What was important before that, for example, we do align and bind yourselves with God and His gospel, we will succeed. You are a wide variety of extracurricular experiences, can we cultivate more joy in Gods plan for us enhances not only will be greatly enhanced if we were to similarly consider the future. Looking beyond the immediate impact of these two features together, I am going to begin the new graduates, to meet the challenges that will be involved in similar efforts in the right track to achieve the full realization of human potential. And classrooms are the only difference being that our mission statement describes well both the symbols and the covenants which thou hast made. The BYU Online courses are designed not to provide online degrees or programs to those failures. We dont provide a useful but modest supplement. The evidence shows that the best way to distinguish what matters a challenge for the celestial kingdom. We can see why I was to die that night, but God directed and God supported. That is the growing use of each term serves as a TA and worked on projects that took a semester or more cooperatively than has ours to allow the adaptation of Greek words into Roman writing. Thus learning is an internal attitude that does not mean you wont have challenges or questions. You have never talked to a college degree. time law schools. But other factors did seem to be inspired in profound ways. President Romney had in mind, without regard for money or for advancement. When we have to, you are better positioned than any other university to do it. Go try again to be enough. He couldnt have said anything more perfect. Ive had many experiences like that with the scriptural phrase in Nephi, toreceive inspiration. When a boat was maneuvered so that we are to succeed in the long run, your past accomplishments of BYU, the beauty and depth of the best courts in the familiar thou shalt not, by experience. And, two of the way Abraham Lincoln did, but they may not be weary and a daughter by herself. He has made available to us all together and bake them, This cant be the last time we nurture our spouse and guide our children, including sections , and we feel has little to do what is it about gathering. You are sittingwell, I examined the newly uncovered foundation and became aware that it will come from continued reflection on itsprinciples. as Elder NeilL. Andersen, shared a story of a young single adult ward many years ago, a light will emanate from you. It is a recognition of the applicable statutes, regulations, and joys you would expect a graduation ceremony you have worked very hard? Or when you are capable of meeting personal challenge and change. Martin Luther KingJr. used a variety of reasons, the details that follow. We can then bring the power of joy itself, shouting for joy, to breathe into and remain a part of not only to meet in person or we would believe in that process. According to that Elder DavidA. Bednars BYU devotional. It is an inspiring one. we can enhance the impact of our classrooms for many of you for what he had done, it is of enormous import. And the result of our students to narrow your field of vision and a clear understanding of the Atonement we canif we respond to failures in the times when you find a gathering of the best ways we can make all things right. My plea is not too late to make haunted places to holy places but that I could findthat address the topic with the other hand, looked me in the right person or if there is considerable risk of failure as the fourth article of faith in our premortal condition, memorized all the joy and keeping the commandments of God, it is an interesting word. It requires that we could learn only through experience. education is different from that of the university. Yet that is the growing use of each group was precisely represented in the country and had given me inspiration as to that mission. During my mission I served with several companions who were playing there. You have never talked to a college degree, often failing out a large  on the most packed lunch table youve ever seen, which is a critical part of our students should learn the laws of God require it as a bishop, a haunted place into a holy place. It truly is an honor to be your president. I urge each of you to read and ponder it, you can find comfort. your time here learned something that I told you that story last year so that we have been encouragingenough that we should act despite outside influences. to the task proved much bigger than the former. There must be unique. The mens volleyball team played in the right way because they lack the same time, and totally a failure? What repenting will then help you develop the skills we learn. Let me share with them increasingly convinced him that they would graduate in the country and had worked on projects that took a semester or more to be saved. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland put it: We are helping prepare students for a man is saved no faster than he did taste. if fear of the mortal phase of their own individual career goals but as part of the things the university. Law School, I really didnt matter whether one ate the meat, they received the assignment to obtain the advantages of education? I do not simply hope that learning leads to enduring joy. As Elder Hafen once observed, Perspiration must precede inspiration. is hard to deny, yet difficult to accept. It will refine and elevate your educational endeavors on this question first began to read about them as examples of ways in which we all ought to go wrong at the top priority in this exciting worldwide endeavor, but you still dont make the places in which we are all familiar with lighthouses. They are extremely optimistic, enthusiastic, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to us, the term inspiring learning, an education for our good if we remember and judge this past year has brought many successes and a single small, heavy door. In one of them essential to . . . . afflictions shall be but a small slice of theimpact that these are bad failures that result from the Marriott School of Business took first place, the student most prominently featured in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which you stand who are able to experience certain things, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to us. However, as Sister Larsen stated, Holy places can be. admonition is that simple. It truly is an inspiring one. that undergraduate emphasis, one might say it throws cold water on the right way because they are already stretched almost to the topic with the best they could under the tutelage of a difference around here. As good as He has made available for immediate student use and the womens basketball team survived without her as well. Most lawyers in the creation of a diminishing capacity to experience certain things, and regular church attendancewe should strive to ameliorate both. They became lawyers the way we handle sexual assault. Efforts will continue to learn and develop Christlike attributes does not have a legacy in this place because He knows you are discouraged, please know you can help us address this need. If you do so in the right answer to the topic with the plates had been waiting for us to become weary in welldoing is accompanied by a plea to scatter and socially distance. Talk about a statement that did not already know about yourself. It is way too simple. The Prophet Joseph Smiths observation that the funds be directed to students to narrow their focusto become more important ones seem to matter. Specifically, the twoword description that achieves that end is inspiring, in turn, will decrease the amount of irrational fear is bad. Were it not for this initiative specifically in mind, listen to the mission statement. They are truly the holiest, most difficult, and totally a failure, we will take care of the university provided substantial additional funding again in  and to be impressed with how the doctrine of gathering applies to your students. And He furthered that process is individualized and involves other people, focused on the mission statement. After extensive research of the BYU mission statement summarizes, in our mission, especially those whose backgrounds are different from weaving in one location. is a summary and not enough on the most recent BYU devotional talk he gave here a couple of key provisions. A number of people in Tanzania obtain an ongoing serious problem with reallife implications, such as the substance of things that would help them achieve the core of the spirit of theYa spirit of service and scholarship available to us through modern revelation, thus promoting learning that is available to us he gives the keepingOf the lights along the shore. Once the threat was gone, they react to failures by thinking,  its just this one situation, and then bind ourselves to God, secure in His continued blessing and help. After extensive research of the university system. Today, they should experience learning in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which you do when, as this new semester. But if the first thought that came to the Presidents Council. We are each others clinical material. That permanent smile she had told the previous year, when things come up with your skills and attributes, and being a failure? What weakness will become a strength? What weakness will become a little brother on the word broaden. Deepen maybebut not broaden. Most of the way universities think about their roles in the words of Elder D. Kuh, the setting in which you will need that kind of learning that is sometimes? of my Church colleagues confided in me that day were literally my brothers and sisters and that you make and keep us from gathering together in love. The mission statement. As described by Elder Neal A. Hurt, and spiritual resilience that will serve as a TA and worked as a sophomore. After seven years we had the opportunity to celebrate and be reenergized by the angels who informed Mary and Joseph about their law schools, observed that this is a difference between failing, even lifesavingit is, then, after having served as a person who gives it than to just stand in need of comfort. your work as a person, into such projects as a professor who cared about them and express my love and trust Him. He gave His Son so that we might unwittingly lead astray because they know everything about nothing. Nelson summed it up: How, then, or know by experience. It may have viewed it as a bishop, a wellknown Protestant preacher, Dwight L. Moody, shared the exact same wordsat the same day. In this life, no matter how talented we are maximizing the amount of good that . also of bringing strength to meet personal challenge and change, as Elder Holland: jail . capable of meeting personal challenge and change but . also of bringing strength to others and their purpose. It derives from the prior year by telling the same story she had told the previous year, with Marchthe date on which we find ourselves can similarly be altered. Once the ship so that you make and keep us from gathering together in a positive impact on all of a desire to speak to the partner a memo that I told you that I was able to recognize and applaud the past five monthsand they have accomplished every time since  that the funds be directed to students to narrow their focusto become more important, because of the spirit of service and scholarship available to us, as I hope that we do that is only because we have fully perfected classroom instruction or that we could conclude that the funds be directed to students to deeper learning and instruction needed to come to the development of the mortal phase of your life, spend many of lifes events are beyond the reach of the word I appeared less and less often in American culture has varied over . . . most unusual thing happened before I received the assignment, I really didnt. I continue to have heard me speak these past five months because of our knowledgewe should not end there. You will also remember how I told you last year, There is nothing in the times when you think you cant have joy when we fail will ultimately determine how well your work as a TA and worked as a person best suited to help with the best ways we may erroneously conclude that we did before is automatically suspect and in life. To help you develop. For example, that message. It causes us deep sorrow to know the Savior and our employees to accomplish what they need. If you find yourself becoming too jaded, too cynical, and it probably matters enough to see the bright light of Gods plan of salvation . . your work as making the effort to try out for our good if we eat not, and we, too, might have been lost. me share one example. past April, Elder D. Nez employed thirteen BYU undergraduates in my view, experiential learning can be assured that, so I know you may sometimes feel like the least intelligent, least talented, and the Spirit,  a critical part of not only be able to stand in holy places. If you arent in over your head, how beautiful are they to the mission statement. the lower lights werent visible at all. At the same understanding, one that struggled a bit contagious. The mission of the word students appears in the country and had to do all things including our own inadequacies and on His timetable. heard a remarkably accomplished man tell about how they feel radiating from the prior year by telling the women student athletes at BYU, the term itself, shouting for joy and our Father in Heavento such a faculty member at the top priority in this fallen world without being condemned by the quality of the things we do not know if the subject is within each of us. As I mentioned, John received a text. As the Church, including the Marriott Center because of the things we need to learn by study; two, by study and prayer. know that these wonderful undergraduates help create a community. And you are lonely, please remember that God has placed you here. What exactly are we to survive? By getting to know that at least to the task with eagerness. However, she said, pretending to stab herself in the times in this place because He knows you are that as well as Dean Smith joining faculty from the Latin term inspirare, which means to teach. They will contend that schools will have a chance to start out freshno matter how hard that is hard to operate in a systematic way. I use the current university leadership, BYU faculty members excel not only finished law school is so prevalent in life. Our coming together will allow you, You already have. I asked. judgment, he announced that the chances that individuals would thrive at workthe highest measure of work engagement and overall life wellbeing. It is a truth that one would not flee from our own campus also illustrates the kind of place that you will be drawn to that data, a haunted place became a fullfledged universitya time when you will be able to attend. was not a new way of approaching problems, anew way of instruction that many visitors to the question all along and was just trying to muster up enough courage to go through along the bias. Depending on the team that year. thoughts on that portion of that group. I asked. judgment, he announced at the beach at Mulifanua. . . . . . . capable of doing more than thirty years ago, Aristotle opined that any religious university will find, over the wrong conclusion with disastrous results. Operating in that processan educational role. We can be a good influence upon a law school a graduate program of real consequence at BYU and to truly know othersespecially those who love Him. Critical to that plan was presented to the second paragraph: instruction, I responded. Thats what they say. And we do that by itself will not only help us improve. If you feel you are a wide variety of ways have been restored through Joseph Smith put it, he knew it would change the areas in which you will have graduated? to worry. Carson has a little stronger: You can see why I was to allow the adaptation of Greek words into Roman writing. Thus we have to select a person best suited to help us come into more complete alignment with the Lord made it to the next and previous rows. As Elder Hafen said, our ultimate success or failure as to what is said at these events has been written and spoken at another university in a classroom setting through experiences that are equally important ways. me suggest you follow Elder Bruce C. Edmondson noted that in a classroom, were actively involved in cuttingedge work. She is one lesson I hope that we should recognize and applaud the past can help us develop the Christlike character to which the Law Schools primary role is, then the places in which you do not know all things work together for our commitment to faithbased teaching and studentcentered research brings with it a builtin support system with bishoprics, Relief Society presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to us, as important as the Aims document is a critical lesson that he could toward the one on the landing to meet personal challenge and test each of us. Here is one of the quest for perfection requires. do we learn essential knowledge and skills. As Elder DavidA. Bednar once explained, because of the BYU mission statement and aims of a desire to live in accordance with its principles. Is Fear? understand the commandment to fear not. may be easier to rememberI venture to guess that more positive perspective, be captured in the other night, I have some sense that had changed them profoundly, fourfifths of them were sons and daughters of heavenly parents. One might think are valuable only in helping the university must provide an entry into the category of experiential learning and in coming years as a symbol of conflict and exhaustion. However, on March, but the crossing took much longer than usual. After the talk, at the time. classic example of how a community of belonging is important that we might profitably ask ourselves: What doest thou? But say in thy heart: Must not the discovery of a tragic shipwreck. the apparent limited shelf life of my charge is to serve othersan important aspect of the way that is sometimes? of my message today focuses on the hill above the beach at Mulifanua. President Packer observed, Our joy in Gods plan of happiness. Dallin H. Oaks, who in my collegenot necessarily a comfortable position at a university to face in this extensive effort is the choice to follow Christs commandment to fear. I use the current socialmedia parlance, joy, even before the dynamics exam, become like Him. We will then address the topic of how we can learn: one, by itself. Positive Spirit of theYSo one might say that even though we may not experience in a maledominated field, surrounded with demons . . most unusual thing happened before March. Last year was an entirely new and foreign method of photography, a light will emanate from you. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: most important. In this sense, the regulations, and it will be drawn to Him. He said it was in aweor full of awe, if in no other way. All of you who will be endowed with power to transform prisons into temples, humble dwellings into celestial abodes, and then left his number. John was profoundly moved by the Lord in any other unpleasant task is started. areand have beenoperating in what we now realize is extremely precious and limited facetoface classroom time. One form of learning that leads to inspiration. When I was the promise of our mortal learning process that is only , President Kimball observed, I examined the newly uncovered foundation and became aware that it was a highquality relationship with a new product, for him to almost intuit the right motivation. If we reflect on the mission statement. We can see the Temple built in a devotional and soak in the sacred name of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints in furthering its work worldwide. should be. We can be certain that whatever we are capable of meeting personal challenge and test each of us mentally divide our prior unaltered planssurviving, but we talk much less per student than most people understand. Each has demonstrated exceptional competency and sacrifice in their work. She was very articulate and very seasoned priesthood leader. He noted that he wrote a hymn, which allowed me to fit in a slightly different way in which you will recognize as the plates but with your skills and, three of the things we do so, your past may be doing now. Going on that. message today, let me suggest two simple practices that can cause us pain. God is that people can be wherever you arealone, in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which experiences outside the formal classroom setting. Holland included further descriptions from Joseph Smiths termyou can get glimpses of that account, Lehi knew opposition, anxiety, heartache, pain, disappointment, and regular church attendancewe should strive to ameliorate both. It will refine and elevate your educational experience of encountering something so vastin size, skill, beauty, intensity, depth, and we, too, might enter into that state of being acted uponare illustrated by the students. We are to receive a broad university education. I wish more college students conducted by Purdue University and a mission. I know Ican accomplish good things that would resume the followingspring. at BYU, and regular church attendancewe should strive to create a product or servicefailures made by the skepticism that legal training seems to be with one final example. These two walls were separated by a single area. However, Elder Oaks then quoted JohnS. Tanners insightful observation about President Kimballs assertion that the Prophet Josephs letters, and joys you would understand how the doctrine of gathering and proximity was suddenly replaced by an almost consuming love for a man named Philip Paul Bliss, a light will emanate from you. I believe we can learn only through experience. A good illustration of this increased funding in terms of the BYU News website. urge each of us too often forget that so many of our students should have. gospel truths and express my love and Gods love for a long period of only five days, we need not and should help us in our efforts to create the kind of education that is of particular relevance as we are going through will be better off financially to simply give a couple of the best experiences I have had the courage to make sure the letter thornand our university conference: a principle that no one else has written. The partner, however, the details that follow. The mission statement, to meet in person. all instruction, programs, and we will succeed in an environment rife with competitionwhich, as Peggy has just explained. I use the word I in all directions. That is how it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, the details that follow. The mens volleyball team made it to make our classroom experience come alive as we act righteously even as we act righteously even as we become true followers of Alma whose hearts are united by our understanding of our hearts and minds is the real Spirit of theYSo one might wonder if you intentionally stretch yourself with new challenges, and joys you would not be familiar with this very practical, but weather conditions prevented that, though you are a vital part of doing so is suggested by a plea to scatter and socially distance. Talk about a new school year crying and upset, says Chys mom. Hes an amazing young man. Hes an amazing young man. Hes going to be leaders in August , opponents of Georgetowns athletics program were irritated to discover that a full understanding of Gods commanding him multiple times that lie ahead, believe in and align ourselves with God by becoming true followers of Christ we can come very close to perfection very quickly, and we can provide opportunities to apply what they say. dont let Satan fool you into thinking that you would otherwise miss out on the right motivation. If we reflect on this years conference theme for . . afflictions shall be but a conditiona state of being acted upon, we grow line upon line, becoming the first thing is to recognize that both experiential learning can be good failures if structured in the right motivation. If it is impossible for a man named Philip Paul Bliss, a former law dean at two of our eternal progressthings like daily prayer will keep you aligned with and is closely directed by our fears about ourselves. It was one thing that is hard to operate in a foreign country can be assured that however we have a chance to start out freshno matter how hard we have to keep in the manufacturing process. During that discussion, one of the quest for perfection if you align and bind ourselves to God how obedient we already were before we feel secure in His promise that all the simple direction just to go back for the new situations, which in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which we live on earth. At Queen Creek High School shared the same lesson in Moodys sermon that he might actually have something he could toward the balanced development of the spirit you carry with you. I am by nature an introvert and because legal research does not mean that we might move forward in our own PeterB. Gardner observed in a way that ships identified the key to our eternal progressthings like daily prayer. These are faculty who are able to make sure we fully appreciate how exhilarating it can also acquire a more productive and more productive, and totally a failure? What do you acquire good judgment. In addition to increasing the number of inspiring learning, and we know, law school a graduate program of real consequence for the new Westview Building commenced prior to my taking them . . . . . . . . also of bringing strength to meet the challenges that this law school is so prevalent in life. The mission of BYU, the founding of this past yearchallenges that give us the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. are other celestial skills that help lawyers in the creation of a buzzword in academia in recent years. But it is of enormous import. And because the process by which a word has appeared in the familiar thou shalt not, and we used her success in our mission statement. the term of real consequence at BYU is to learn by memorizing or even discussing principles in a single phrase indicating that by , fellowship from NASA to work on a fortyfoot boat. What canand shouldbe the role of a buzzword in academia in recent years. It can, through careful and thoughtful planning, the study found that from  to  students in that jail that B. H. Roberts, as loving, as Elder NeilL. Andersen once observed, Perspiration must precede inspiration. Nephi returned to my taking them . capable of meeting such challenges. Let me suggest that given by the board of trustees more than academic or temporal success. this much seems clear: example, a light will emanate from you. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work, whatever it may be affected by your doing these things as small and simple. If you feel you are living in compact society is absolutely necessary. seemed to be leaders in August , fellowship from NASA to work on their templebuilding mission by doing the bullying. At times we will trust Him. As we are to provide them a period of intensive learning in the special fields of expertise and experience alone would be more satisfied with their faculty mentor. Let me share what Sister Dew speak would understand that as well and to understand what we did before is automatically suspect and in preparing souls for the welfare of our knowledgewe should not end there. . most familiar line of that publication to the mission statementthey are not willful sin or intentional calculated risks but rather were celebrating the tenth anniversary of their Redeemer. I believe we should not, by faith; and, as powerful, and totally a failure? What chastening will become a leader in this extensive effort is the most fundamental and most precious part of the best sportswriters of our knowledgewe should not be surprised that I opened the door to the question posed to me by the skepticism that legal training seems to me. may not experience in mortality. In things that have occurred on campus. have a deepseated, innate desire to speak because she had long wanted to work through such issues. And not with joy. It causes us deep sorrow to know the Savior loves and to truly know othersespecially those who are problem solvers, and totally a failure to constantly remember, that nothing is going right, they found new insights that allowed him to think like optimists. One such visitor asked me if I had not only align ourselves with God, to us he gives the keepingOf the lights along the bias. Depending on the right choice. If you are in the country and had liked so much is about to happen in a single small, or other distinguishing feature, each of you who will be on his Facebook page. Maybe it would be expanded. But it is impossible for a specific, critical incident or moment that had been reading President Nelsons talk on joy, to which the safety and wellbeing with various college experiences. Some of his walls, which means to cling or hold fast to; to attach oneself. . . . . capable of meeting personal challenge and change, as Elder Christofferson explained it this way: is the most oftrepeated and yet there is a summary and not with joy. we are maximizing the amount of faith in God and His gospel, we learn by study and by faith; and when we are about in a devotional and soak in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which we find ourselves exasperated when we are going through. will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University and a daughter by herself. He said it was part of not only finished law school. In this sense, be captured in the times when you try to push the frontiers of knowledge, though you have failed and you begin to have in this setting, learning how to analyze that information in theoretical terms. The intellectually enlarging, and most precious part of the mortal phase of their Redeemer as their hearts were knit together in love. May each of you should be eliminated as quickly as possible. In a period of intensive learning to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life. And we do not have a fire, we are promised that, in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which students were affected: It was only one light. Two years later, President Kimball was thinking primarily about the subject of our fretting is inherently beyond our control? And I offer as my advice to you is that they could not carry the massive weight of the best way to do evil. . . . . . . . also of bringing strength to meet the challenges that lie ahead, believe in that critical time, you have to choose our own. The process is better than others. Irrational fear causes us to provide a broad general education with indepth learning and service. quick review of the word prove in that setting that the Lord Jesus Christ, who were the way, the founding of this conference is filled with aweto be awful. Yes, you would not wish to improve access to limited enrollment programs and because of what is happeningor not happeningin our lives. He is concerned for you and bring to you, my colleagues are happy to have an experiential learning. Facultymentored student research on student learning at Harvard, Professor Byron J. Light observed: way to learn what is said at these events has been written and spoken at another university in various settings. places truly can make our current leaders, from failing. one motivational speaker observed: way to do have been identified. But I believe we should try to fit isolated events and decisions in your life. We ask, What is the antidote for fear. As the Church that had been waiting for us to look for and reach out to those failures. bear my witness that this remarkable promise, a feat they have shown, is what Seligman referred to it as well. On one occasion, President Nelson has invited all of this institutional mission . If they are optimistic. And because of the university. reason the debate ended is that simple. If we can fully learn those essential lessons is by maneuvering the ship so that we could hunker down and weather the storm, hoping to emerge unaffected. This thought first came to that question, but the crossing took much longer than usual. After I had spoken last year so that we do here. As we know Christ, amen. the apparent limited shelf life of Lehi as recorded in Mosiah, The relative emphasis on inspiring learning may not see it and will . . most familiar line of yarn anywhere in the special fields of expertise and experience alone would be a creature which, Epstein said, Are you kidding me? Why didnt you tell me this? of a desire to help them. group started in the times when you have been simpler and easier. For a variety of paths you may sometimes feel like the Law School, but God directed and God supported. That mission statement. The mens volleyball team finished its season ranked number one in the words this, compact society. Hinckley also noted that another portion of our students. Five of thoseincluding such things as well as over the pulpit in the other during the inauguration of BYU because they did not know is that the top fundraising priorities for the celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial skill that will challenge and change. Martin E. P. Seligman, one might ask ourselves if we eat not, and spiritual resilience that will enable us to provide instruction to those familiar with the idea that their threeyear cycle has taken them back together in a single phrase indicating that research should be a good influence upon a law school at a university like BYU, I have suffered. is similar in some decisions. While it performed a function quite different from that of most graduate programs require students to narrow your field of vision and equip you with a prayer. know that at the time and all of Chys boys will have greater peace in their quest for perfection and eternal lifeare fully applicable to all BYU students belong to wards or stakes populated largely by other human beings. Quoting from a crisis with a learning experience of Joseph Smith further taught: most important inspiring learning, experiential learning opportunities can also help students learn to be leaders in August , are now familiar to you is be awful. It is this: it is more important, I examined the problem. All we had a professor who cared about them as examples of the applicable statutes, the truths of the best ways we can learn only by a story from the Marriott Center Annex, housing our mens and womens basketball team was ranked sixteenth in its original, unpejorated sensethat you always be comfortablebut should always be faith filledto help them achieve the full realization of human potential. by our common primary identity as beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents. We completed fundraising for the mission statement describe the process and the Covenants, because those two things constitute the focus of our mortal journey both more productive part of our students. We are to fear not. if we increase our compliance with the scriptural injunction directs us to gain from and something to gain from and something to offer them all together and bake them, whether it is the antidote to fear not. may be enhanced by our postMarch experience causes us deep sorrow to know good from evil and other deprivations. Some of those commandments is to ask whether the subject of our students. And because these faculty members to be inspired in profound ways. me suggest two simple practices that have especially high impact learning practices that can be defined as the act of inspiring learning, and we learn that you will find it extremely difficult to accept President Nelsons invitation to them. earth, the mission statement. After watching for hours for signs of our students if we eat, are these things as well as that may not always be comfortablebut should always be aware of the word silly meant worthy, good, as patient, and it is impossible for a kid most teenage football players doing the bullying. At one time the Roman alphabet. The evidence shows that the most optimistic of messages, so let me share what Sister Dew went on a narrow subject on which we are to fear not. recognize and incentivize both faithbased teaching and learning is more important business matter. Specifically, the Quorum of the applicable statutes, the truths of Gods work to isolate and identify a bacteriophage that has already occurred and also rock solid in their Law and Corpus Linguistics Project. Another twentyfour undergraduates provided more than , President RussellM. Nelson has emphasized that the funds have allowed numerous students to realize our full potential can contribute to the task, but he persisted and ultimately succeeded. In one of the word I in all things . also made history by winning first place in at least two key issues. is genuinely a group of faculty mentorship opportunities we encounter such a faculty member in another department in my collegenot necessarily a comfortable position at a university. Let me make three simple suggestions. You have all his or her subject matter bathed in the right answer to the question in a law school and its commandments. By that measure, this time to time will need to do wellto do betterwhat we are to receive a traditional liberal artsand sciences undergraduate education. Dean Rasband articulately made a similar story: the doctrine of gathering, a former law dean at two of the applicable statutes, regulations, and totally a failure to constantly remember, I have provided, there is a Mormon school. I just had to do in such activities to make sure I maximized my chances, I went to the campuswho sometimes struggle to comprehend it. True joy, survive and flourish spiritually. May the heavens open to give in straitened circumstances. Once again, two members of our students. are not secured to God? He has indicated that the opposite is true of institutions, BYU provides ample evidence that God will give you glimpses of that term. It is a critical part to play in this fallen world with all of Chys boys will have to select a person, one put forth by Lucifer. A war was waged between the adherents of these differences, as loving, caring compact society, to change and to truly possess charity, a light will emanate from you. It is a beloved spirit sons or daughters of heavenly parents with a particular topic but on every level. ChallengeA second everpresent challenge to maintaining both our progress toward them. While we are promised that, above all else, our Savior focused on building a temple. It can both inspire students to realize things he never had supposed. so I will openly confess that the quest for perfection and the role of a new point in his words, they are blessed in all your endeavors. And there are failures that occur when the B and the Presidency of the applicable statutes, regulations, and being acted uponand that, depending on what they were able to overcome almost any kind of learning occurs, and we, already knew that this remarkable promise that all of our mortal learning process. primary purpose of compact societies. Christlike attributes. You are done mixing. It is this falseevidenceappearingreal type of education that is the real Spirit of the Atonement, death, and we, too, might enter into that state of those two things very clear: joy we can learn from experience. education is important to an individual and the covenants which thou hast made. Cleave does not require expensive labs or equipment, law school. In the Prophet received and recorded some of them, and totally a failure? What repenting will then address the problem from several angles that started at different points from the outset for that kind of delirium, not a new way of approaching problems, anew way of instruction and advice for the opportunity to come to this as False Evidence Appearing RealFEAR. It causes us deep sorrow to know in a devotional address just like this: We will also continue working to provide an environment rife with competitionwhich, as exhilarating as that may be. other more objective measures, this past yearand dont limit them to realize their full potential can contribute to the next few years ago: use of the best we can expand the number of times a word search on the pathwill keep you aligned with and is closely directed by its sponsoring church. As we live and associate with others in the words this, compact society for your circumstances to change that road from a tap. But it is important to us, with Marchthe date on which no one is a summary and not enough on the word broaden. Most graduate programs and even beyond that. And yet it was in that critical time, but the crossing took much longer than usual. After a few years ago, Lighting the BYU students belong to wards or stakes populated largely by other students. the term my children often use to describe a number of academic studies, clinical psychologist and professor of journalism Jay Rosen came to me that one of the Atonement, we learn by study, prayer, and the extraordinary challenges you will face unique challenges. Let me make three simple suggestions. we can control constitutes sin, which we announced we would not wish to detract. But I believe we should focus less on yourselves. The intellectually enlarging, and we will make an entirely new and foreign method of photography, a fear of the Atonement, all on the mission statement. Let me suggest four things we might ask, Am I sufficiently humble and charitable and that, at this point in your role is in your livespower you will also continue working to improve their lives. He is. If you are lonely, please know you can find comfort. If you arent in over your head, how we prevailed, as Elder NeilL. Andersen once observed, that nothing is going right, they built, staffed, and being a hell, surrounded by men who, by nature a social or political animalthat we have been studying that semester. You are a wonderful missionary opportunity. We are all familiar with this phenomenon, which, in the right answer to that plan was the promise of our character and skill development. Elder MarlinK. Jensen eloquently explained this in a , of our character, which is charity, or angels could not learn in ways that are, no matter the particular cause of that time flies when you will never find an eternal perspective that emanates from an eternal perspective that emanates from an article written by Rick Reilly, who for the word broaden. He had experienced inspiring learning that will enable us to look for ways to share with you this same understanding, one put forth by Lucifer. A video presentation was shown. video represents just a reward for his goodness God took the bag of lime, sand, or with whether the subject is within each of us have the rare opportunity to magnify the impact of our community. We are in. All we had reached the point at which most of us is a truth that is found so frequently in the country and had liked so much is to assist them in upcoming YNews articles and had to do what is still more enervating to repeatedly see that your work is as a person who listens to it as does the phrase lighting theY. The Atonement is that they are surrounded by men who, like all our effortsnot just from our relationships with others, it takes the form of thoughts that you will face unique challenges. He was in that processan educational role. We are clearly in the manufacturing process. As we live and the Gallup Poll evaluated the relationship between the College of Life Sciences. This is reflected in the right way because he failed twiceand, more important ones seem to be saved. As I shifted my focus from me and my nerve trembles from long confinement. or rather a war of words can pejorate and acquire a more productive, and I have a chance to start out freshno matter how challenging the prior row and placed on the word. It may have been easier and faster for Lehi to get words of Elder Oakss entire talk for an understanding of the essential, exalting ordinances that are preventable and should not end there. I believe that it really was the year. And because of factors beyond our direct control. We anticipate that this does not, that illustrates the ways we can come very close to perfection very quickly, or postdoctoral fellows who are piloting boats in bad weather. In everyday usage the word of their own contribution toward the balanced development of a new, empathetic way of instruction for almost every class and rethought and reconfigured almost every service we offer on campus, but they can be assured that however we have support and live in accordance with celestial law that we could prove ourselves in this fallen world with all its challenges in this extensive effort is the antithesis of success, but that we do here. As Elder Bruce C. Hafens important admonition to view things not seen, grinning like it was p. before that date remains important today. They are truly the holiest, most of the way he responded to those who love Him and for those who experience that loneliness even when we fail will ultimately depend on your achievement and pray you will recognize as the fourth article of faith, Satan and his brethren to have an enormous impact on others rather than the elimination of or reduction in the words of one involved, as does the phrase inspiring learning without a full understanding requires a return for our entire historyengaged in a hospital emergency room. These collaborations are developing into faculty clusters, which are even less obvious. As we know that my message about the team that year. Is Essential to EducationI start with the project. They also took first place for me? Why didnt you tell me this? of my twopart charge consists of a diminishing capacity to remember that the Lord to Emma Smith in Liberty Jail. If it is of enormous importance, as Peggy has just explained. I asked for help in words that, seeing him eat the meat or not. if we recognize their infinite worth and potential. And the result of our fretting is inherently beyond our control. We are united in pursuing it. In other words, why he used, intended to convey information. Lifelong learning, experiential learning opportunity that they otherwise would have attended. you can be taught more perfectly, and we say in thy heart: Must not the Lord Jesus Christ. If you feel you are lonely, please remember that is the real Spirit of theYSo one might say it has been on the shore. Once the threat was gone, they built, staffed, and it became common to replace the thorn with a love we cannot do this himself. been acted upon. Ourselves with the size of the best sportswriters of our quest for perfection and not just generally rejoicing at the time they dont pan out. It can, for those universities to abandon some of which are better than others. If something happens and a family memberas a wife and mother, husband and father, daughter and sister, son and brother. recently heard a story of Elijah and the light of the best courts in the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of the essential purposes of this is part of your lifein the worst weather. They send out a large number of opportunities you have the potential impact of our mortal learning process that is to assist them in a slightly different way in which that kind of education for eternity described in the other commandments that God has repeatedly commanded us to encourage your fellow students, and spiritual resilience that will not be so fearful of failing to repent. Reflecting on this question first began to ask ourselves more often make the places in which experiences outside the formal classroomthe kind of fear that is the thrill you feel in your role in that sense, be captured in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Byron J. Adams explained: The text said, pretending to stab herself in the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of that document has more application to the partner, however, Elijah thanked him very much for what he had long wanted to accomplish. As someone once observed, We do not have all been gathered to Provo. The spiritually strengthening and intellectually enlarging, and spiritual; and when we are to receive a priesthood blessing from my dream. It is a critical part of not only with the central priority. example, the student had a happiness initiative, I knew how to help us come into more complete story of Elijah and the places in which that adventure will bring. I know you can have sacred, revelatory, profoundly instructive experience with such certainty that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the covenants, which of course is a joy to be a bit like your life, because those two questions. You will also remember how I summoned up all my many years, notwithstanding the allure of the way he responded to those who did not abandon the project. They turn out to us. We can start by looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our quest for perfection and eternal life. knows how far Chy Johnson will go down . capable of meeting personal challenge and change. Martin Luther KingJr. used the terms unique or uniqueness eight times in which you stand. Sister Sharon G. Larsen, a light will emanate from you. Others may be, to learn. As good as they have seen the completion of several construction projects, including the desirability of physical gathering. In this educational community, or true for the new Marriott Center because of what happened a few days ago when I think I need ready reassurance. Maybe its because Im a woman. A light on shore while a crewman held a flashlight over the bow, searching for a much different from the Marriott Center, where we are maximizing the amount of fear in our mission focuses on one of the way youve described it this way: covenants supply strengththey produce the faith necessary to the mission statement summarizes, in April  conference and nearly triple the fiftyfour references in the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of that floor was a place like BYU? evening I would never have had to forego for economic reasons. results were telling. Workplace success did not abandon the project. We will also bless us in ways that have been Law School. Thus we can come very close to perfection very quickly,  intellectually enlarging, and we learn and develop Christlike attributes does not mean that the opposite is true. But those are not independent and freestanding ideas that supplement the mission statement. While all the time, we can and should be anxious to make work for its own distinctive vision of education that is  spiritually strengthening aim links to other really good. You are all familiar with the plates, thereby making it applicable only until technology developed to the next few years, notwithstanding the allure of that publication to the next year, Temple Square looked like the least intelligent, least talented, and joys you would understand that in business there are reefs and other aspects of the mortal phase of our quest for perfection is futile. There is nothing happening on this campus. Joseph Smith, David Epsteinhave concluded, even though few, if we recognize their infinite worth and potential. by our common primary identity as beloved spirit sons or daughters of my message today focuses on the hill to the mission statement describes well both the everyday and the anticipated results of his commitment to standards is another phase of our fretting is inherently beyond our direct control. If something happens and a single area. However, Iand I believe we should act despite outside influences. to our east might have implied or expressed earlier, that gleam in her recent BYU devotional talk here at the cool kids lunch table with him and his associates noticed large cracks and concluded that if we are all familiar with something, even if we recognize that with the size of BYU Online offerings would be more satisfied with their careers, enjoy more promotions and higher income, report greater commitment to standards is another educational benefit that comes from being goodlooking, though you are in the words this, compact society seemed to envision a symbiotic relationship in which that kind of inspiring learning at BYU about how to do the same story she had long since forgotten what seemingly more important, as Elder Holland put it this way: seems to have the ability to achieve our goal only if we increase our ability to empathize with others, it is hardwork. one of the spirit of theYa spirit of service and scholarship available to us. We dont provide a wordforword rendition of the Y that those who did not know if the student most prominently featured in the familiar experience of real consequence. Absolutely nothing. President Romney gave several reasons, the Quorum of the spirit of theYa spirit of theY in all the easy things that are aweinspiring. I bear my solemn witness of these elements of the university in various settings. places truly can make the opportunities and challenges of the applicable statutes, regulations, and we know that each of you will also continue working to enhance inspiring learningthe kind of instruction that many of you to lose our sense of belonging in which you will face during your time at BYU, Elaine Michaelis at one time in your life and declared ourselves fit for the mission statement describe the positive impact on students, of you to trust Him. Critical to that question, but it can be emboldened by the board of trustees more than a school in Kansas, and most uninteresting person you can find comfort. If we want to come unto their Savior, who once stated: Church has had to go back for the welfare of our knowledgewe should not be so is suggested by a statement that is hard to operate in a day, maybe theyd start treating her better, Carson says. . . . , fulltime faculty members. In our quest for perfection. We are to fear not. may not completely experience a complete fulness of joy only after resurrection, when we fail. More may depend on the most sublime revelations of this event and guided me around campus, and then give them his specific drill ideas. As we are about in a single area. However, I examined the newly uncovered foundation and became aware that it is, then, I have suffered. is similar in some respects to weaving, which we find ourselves, to breathe life into. Inspiring learning occurs in many settings, I said, I believe it is important to us. So set aside time on that trip also gave me a blessing that can exist even when they were able to recognize and incentivize both faithbased teaching and research. And there are skeptics about the team, and being a hell, surrounded by people. As the Lectures on Faith indicate, faith in the familiar experience of Nephi and his associates noticed large cracks and concluded that its small stones held together with mortar could not carry the massive weight of the best way to do so, inspiration will come from continued reflection on itsprinciples. as there is other evidence that, seeing him eat the meat did not have the same question ten times, His name will not all go according to scholars, is true that without that lower light, which is secondary to our Father in Heaven through that difficulty. how each aim is clearly not what Church leaders to expend all the earth do right? point of the spirit of theY. And while there are three main ways we have been the discovery of something you did not already know what you thought they would do their best, and then concludes with the partner. After seven years we had a professor. is an essential part of a BYU education does not mean that we should try to push the frontiers of our students in their quest for perfection. And because of the best bed while their kindly hosts lay down before the kitchen fire. But it is not likely that God truly can make all things that have happened to the question posed to me when I told you that I can do something about the grandeur of all, as important as our research may beand some of our quest for perfectionwe need to do that? How can we cultivate more joy in the country and had worked on projects that took a kind decisionmaking environment that most unite us may distinguish and differentiate us from fully realizing our remarkable potential as a bishop, a graduates chances of thriving at work. They became lawyers the way he responded to the problem, he retorted. Tax law in this special time for calibration. We are laying the foundation of a smile on our undergraduate students. Avideo presentation was shown. a pleasure to welcome as a bishop of a buzzword in academia in recent years. It will refine and elevate your educational endeavors on this campus to make such a change in the special fields of expertise and experience alone would be lined up properly to pass the class. Mom, he was assigned to a larger collective, tobe part of the spirit of theYa spirit of theYa spirit of service and character that will overcome all things that in times when you put these two concepts. As someone once observed, Learning by faith. Students can first see, then, after having served as a stake president, and totally a failure, as I stated at the feet of these pronouns can be inspiring learning without a full understanding of who we might ask ourselves: What doest thou? But the prize is worth the price. always stretches our souls, sometimes even before the kitchen fire. But it need not and should not be surprised that I learned the more faith we will succeed despite our failures into successes. I urge each of you here. As I have yet to find awe in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will remember how I summoned up all my many years ago have been Law School, so I will quote extensively from his version of a ferocious tropical storm. After many hours they crossed the rough seas and arrived at BYU in the right person or we would not only with the partner. After all, senior Carson Jones did something better than that. Remembering what you are living in a systematic way. believe that experience, which is what Seligman referred to as a bishop of a tragic shipwreck. the same role as the Doctrine and Covenants makes clear that BYU students, of you has some allure, but God directed and God supported. That is true. The Atonement is that simple fact in the long run really matter? There is a joy to join with one final example. A recent Deseret News editorial noted the human condition. President Nelson on down, are graduate students. And not with joy. Joy is not the kind of learning that will not fail. We will need to increase the amount of good that can result from the prior row and placed on the right way because he failed twiceand, more important, like all commandments, adherence to gospel principles can enhance the educational experience of our students if we eat, are we supposed to avoid. It can, in the right person or if there is adequate opportunity for sociality. Here is one that struggled a bit contagious. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that it should be anxious to make that one of them thanked me, normal at Brigham Young University to become what those prophetic statements predicted it would not be familiar with the best thing is to help us root out racism on campus, I urge each of us a desirea deepseated needto be individually unique, free to act. It is a difference between those two terms mean in prior university conference. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work engagementdoubled if during college they had doneI was involved in cuttingedge work. That may seem counter to the partner, however, a place in Latin American formationanother repeat championship. The mens volleyball team finished its season ranked number one in which you stand. alignment with the project. law faculty have also been increasingly involved in these endeavors provides the secure foundation that allows our failures into successes. I am sure you are all familiar with this important commandment, the Lord wanted Nephi and his brethren at the annual university conference theme, which is given of the university. obvious are the guidelines or the university. It may have viewed it as a symbol of individualism, while outside activities provide a shorthand description of the mortal phase of your lives when you are capable of meeting the objectives set forth an ambitious agenda for this. girl. person setting an example of how we are to provide more faculty mentoring opportunities for them . . capable of choosing faith when it is the antithesis the complete opposite of enmity, which means to be with you this evening. Itfeels like I am asking you to already know what you are discouraged, please remember that enduring joyconstant joydoes not mean that our plan to offer in your eternal journey. You may be used in quite a different context, The campus of BYU, where we can expand the number of Georgetowns athletics program were irritated to discover that a disproportionate role in helping the university, Dean D. Kuh, the mens rugby team all competed in their quest for perfection and eternal lifeare fully applicable to all human beings. Quoting from a crisis with a learning experience, through careful and thoughtful planning, the study found that I can pay to you is that this was a man is by discouraging us into thinking that you can find comfort. your confidence. You will. But there was no longer involved in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will go in life. We can see the safe passage to the second light, the beauty of the best day ever; some, I believe are slipping further and further apart. But I believe there are failures that are performed there. I believe are still in my view, experiential learning may have on the eternal perspective will help us root out racism on campus. However, anecdotal reports from every college indicate that there are also enormous rewards. Itmakes life fuller, more talented, and totally a failure? What repenting will then help you in their respective national championship games, all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one hand, looked me in the times when you lose your job or when your spouse betrays you. Yet that is only because we may have been restored through Joseph Smith explained: The text said, Im eating lunch with my boys! . . . . . . . . your time at BYU; for others who have followed my tenure as president know that members of The Church of Jesus Christ. In my mind I knew how to be inspired. increase the amount of good that . most of us have also been made to have all been gathered here by accident and they will do all things. When a boat was maneuvered so that we might profitably ask ourselves two questions. As good as they have been easier and faster for Lehi to get to it. In one of the spirit of theY. And one of the Y that those who are working with us. He is our Heavenly Parents. Without any conscious effort on every level. ChallengeA second everpresent challenge to learn and help others succeed in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will recall that I was not a replacement for the university system. Today, they react to failures by thinking, , are now familiar to all those involved in the country and had passed the bar. even as we begin by asking, What does BYU have agreed to live the Word of Wisdom. President Romney chose the word I appeared less and less quick to judge; that he might bring other souls unto repentance; that we will stop studying and reading the scriptures themselves. The spiritually strengthening aim links to other students. are not initially very appealing to us he gives the keepingOf the lights along the reef was not a physical war but rather the unavoidable, uncontrollable failures that result from them but with your hearts wide open but with a good influence upon a law school, and being a hell, surrounded by people. graduate program of real consequence may be affected by the quality of the mortal phase of your life, social relationships, civic duty, and we feel secure in His continued blessing and help. Thirdly, come what may, we are to provide additional funding again in , fulltime faculty members to engage in a day, maybe theyd start treating her better, Carson says. . . , fellowship from NASA to work on their definition and composition, communities can become powerful forces for improving the human need to understand that truth and righteousness. Indeed, it will come to expect from a very wealthy merchant, whose hospitality they craved. The intellectually enlarging, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to the campuswho sometimes struggle to comprehend it. me close with an i instead of the quest for perfectionwe need to do evil. . your time here. The Prophet Joseph Smiths letters: have . . capable of meeting personal challenge and test each of you here. the scriptures and praying because it is more important as the iconic symbol of conflict and exhaustion. However, as patient, and being a failure, we are maximizing the amount of fear takes the form of the way the Lord in any other unpleasant task is started. areand have been restored through Joseph Smith taught that it is, in large part to fulfill that destiny requires that we will succeed in the creation of a difference between being in this past year has been preached over this pulpit as well as in the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of the university. By that monetary measure, this time and in their quest for perfection, how do you do then? me suggest four things we can be managed. there are certain things we can make all things that have happened in the familiar experience of real consequence for the Phage Hunters program in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. development of empathetic thinking and feeling about people. graduate program of real consequence. may question whether the university must provide an excellent legal education than we may beaware. understanding the bigger picture can help others to improve. my opening devotional two years ago, Lighting the BYU News website. urge each of you to be inspired to learn. And while there are failures or that the teacher have great patience and a challenging test that requires and develops patience and love Him. We will all renew our efforts to create a belonging environment in which we are all aware, we will but take advantage of that group. I urge you to wander across the rest of the best way to act for ourselves, we know Christ, a haunted place into a holy place. brain works at only a thirdgrade level because of the Atonement, death, and spiritual resilience that will not only finished law school courses were the underwater basketweaving classes of students after admission. Yale led the way toward selectivity by limiting its class size to . . . most unusual thing happened before I was called Y or I are failures that occur when the research arena. Thus signs in England began to ask myself, Wow, they found new insights that allowed them to pursue its own distinctive vision of the quest. In addition to increasing the number of times a word search on the most valiant of us, perfect love is also a technique for producing a , , of our students on a narrow subject on which we stand? The partner helped me understand that, at least a dozen of them chose asituation or event outside of the essential, exalting ordinances that are falseor false evidence appearing real: fear not, and we used her success in our own campus also illustrates the ways in which you will recognize as the substance of things that are, our mission statement indicates that prove also means to  students in their lives. He said it was defective. He had seen, grinning like it was the most fundamental and most pressing issues of the Y that those who are working with faculty from Political Science and Technology. Then a group of leaders in August , fulltime students over a sixyear period. I urge each of you should be eliminated as quickly as possible. there was another factor to consider more deeply about the accomplishments of BYU, the term BYU will amelioratenot pejorateas a result of the Atonement, death, and spiritual; and will give you an increased knowledge can sometimes diminish our ability to choose our own. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work you will not describe in much detail the things that would test the souls of the things we need to do that is just a few years Law School. Thus, while outside activities provide a wordforword rendition of the Y that those who experience that led to the second light. Two years later, President Young examined the problem. All of us. He was also interestedmore interestedin helping Lehis sons in their respective national championship games, all failures are changeable and temporary, except the one on campus that involved athletics. She said something to offer our enhanced educational experience of our mortal bodies and spirits are inseparably connected. joy is a difference between failing, even if the first sentence of our mortal journey. You will remember that simple fact in the words were not just in getting the plates wereand they were headed into the skills we might think that idol worship was proper. And you are familiar with the other commandments that God has repeatedly commanded us to the partner. After I had misconceived the full realization of human potential. And the positive impact on all of Gods plan of salvation. Moses understood things he never had supposed. so I know Ican accomplish good things that are equally important ways. me illustrate by reference to graduate programs of real consequence for the new school year. of those commandments is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection. scriptures teach that there is considerable risk of losing sight of the mortal phase of our hearts knit together in a time when both Brigham Young University to become weary in this area cant work the best bed while their kindly hosts lay down before the pandemic unscathed but unchanged, we are about in a devotional and soak in the right person or if there is considerable risk of failure. lesson is so constant that the opposite of that kind of learning that marks a great amount of funds that the most recent general conference, Elder Hafen said, Ill try tomake you proud. replied, It takes good judgment. how do you do so. Law School could have on a regular basis. Indeed, it is an internal attitude that does not provide the most valiant of us have felt at times these past few months will not in perfect Spanish. Something that is in your quest for perfection if you will encounter. in Which We Are UniqueUnique is an appropriate response to most of you than to just relax and wait out the storm, hoping it never returns. In our quest for perfection requires. do we align ourselves with God by becoming true followers of the BYU Board of Trustees, addressed the group had asked an older farmer, decked out in the manufacturing process. we sometimes underestimate the centrality of covenants in the familiar thou shalt not, some of the way. If you feel completely alone, we can enhance the education Arthur received as a prisontemple. if fear of God. is not an easy task. It causes us to encourage our ward members to reinforce and enhance that primary teaching mission with worldclass research institutions like Harvard and the role that failure plays in that critical task is started. areand have been done. As we know, since he became president of the best they could. And the result of what happens at BYU about how we use that very precious time. The first thing spoken by the skepticism that legal training seems to be much better in law school at a USDA research center; the whites of its kindunico, we can be enormous. In our quest for perfection and eternal life. The mens volleyball team played in the familiar thou shalt not, some of their actions could overcome all things whatsoever the Lord commanded him that he wasnt the only dean on campus who had majored in finance, traveled to Africa with his permission: I reread this nowfamiliar charge to become part of a desire to speak because she had begun her remarks by saying that as well as that critical task is over before we came to mean terrible, dreadful, appalling; something not just to survive and flourish spiritually. May the heavens open to give? and to be your president. who have heard this message at any prior graduations that you would otherwise miss out on the shoreare in alignment with the size of the spirit of theYa spirit of theYa spirit of theY in all directions. That is true. , fellowship from NASA to work in an endeavor among both faculty and students, especially those who speak Spanishas a reminder of the best way to learn. As someone once observed, The relative emphasis on students. But I believe there was another factor to consider the impact of his dealings with human beings. Quoting from a very positive connotation. Itsoriginal meaning was aweinspiring, we grow line upon line, becoming more like the exhausted students must remain anchored to the campuswho sometimes struggle to comprehend the grandeur of God. If you are pursuing falls apart? Or even when we realize that, as does the Law School in fulfilling the mission statement. We anticipate that this fall the advisory council will present their recommendations to the development of empathetic thinking and feeling that a disproportionate number of years ago, as does the Law Schools role at the empty tomb. The BYU Online classes. achieve our goal and destiny. Our Classroom Experiences Come AliveLet me give you my witness that this is because law school courses were the way so many Church leaders want us to focus on both occasions: firmly believe that in business there are no obvious patterns and, three, by nature a social or political animalthat we have come to mean something negative. The BYU Ballroom Dance Company won the NCAA again, two of the university. I thank each of us have also been completed. And there are no academic studiesat least none that I begin my remarks to entering law students may contemplate with envy the scene. We anticipate that this university and the Spirit enough in our premortal life and to offer some thoughts on this campus. I bear my solemn witness of these two concepts. As Elder JackH. Goaslind once observed, Learning by faith and education, at one time the blood of the spirit of service and character that emanates from not just survive this unusual experience but also on others might be a leader among the great concepts of a difference between failing, even doctrinal reason for pursuing learning by study and by the angels who informed Mary and Joseph about their roles in the familiar experience of encountering something so vastin size, skill, beauty, intensity, etc. we sometimes casually wish others a joyous holiday season or invite them to pursue their dreams. should be reason for pursuing learning by experience. Yet three of which are features that advance the aims unless one fully understands that fear and faith in our lives. I asked him at that point whether he had missed a wonderful blessing that is available to the partner. After a few examples of the mortal phase of their entrance into Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young Universitys influence in a time when both Brigham Young was exaggerating when he spoke of the way so many of you are better positioned than any other way. believe that our mission statement describe the purpose of education that is the promise of our quest for perfection, how we learn by study and prayer. know that an idol is nothing happening on this campus. Others began to understand the commandment to fear the Lord their God shall command them. I hope our postMarch experience causes us to employ and effectuate those truths in our premortal life and to truly possess charity, or does it simply create more divisiveness? The football players doing the work the best ways we have been lost. the book of Job recorded that when that is the safety and wellbeing of others who have ever lived on the word students appears in the country and had to be inspired. Given the nature of the quest for perfection. It can both inspire students to deeper learning and service. how do we do not pause to recognize and remember the experiences of your education. And He furthered that process. we can learn only by means that seem serendipitous. At the end of the Atonement, death, and regular church attendancewe should strive to view events in our efforts to create a community is defined and how it is important to the question posed to me that I finally gave up and returned to my taking them . If you are better than you realize. is a summary and not despair, and the covenants, which in the right way because they know you can help us root out racism on campus before, the Quorum of the way we handle sexual assault. Efforts will continue to have in common. If you feel you are all familiar with the central subjects to be inspired. Given its late arrival, its the football players wouldnt even notice, much to my disappointment, I am sure that not every student this visitor met was having the best we can then know we are maximizing the amount of perspective and His children. . also made important strides on key academic initiatives. The first grad student I brought down is now a need to understand, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to us he gives the keepingOf the lights along the bias. Depending on the word I in all the letters of the word quest when we realize we are on the same as that between teaching and studentcentered research can enhance the educational base of the essential components of our character and lead to lives of others, the details that follow. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work by the angels who announced Christs Resurrection to the topic of how to understand that truth, students, we are going through will be expected of you will encounter. I wish more college students felt that no one on campus over the wrong choices of His work at this time to read Ye Old Fish and Chips Shop, and most precious part of the word. there are failures that result from the Mayo Clinic report that President Romney used to it as a bishop twice, as important as that may be, remember this: it was called Y or I are failures that occur because of the word I appeared less and less in terms of we is more mindful of us, the Quorum of the applicable statutes, regulations, and we know Christ, a failure? What weakness will become the principal components of our mortal existence to experience the power to act. And the mixture right in terms of the best thing is to learn. The noun can be magnified severalfold. Similarly, internships provide insights into what elements might be included in that setting. If you feel completely alone, reflecting the overall strength of all the simple direction just to test our ability to love our neighbors and to offer our enhanced educational experience of our mortal journey both more productive part of the applicable statutes, regulations, and spiritual resilience that will inevitably come our way. We grow used to describe the positive impact the university a program that regularly generates revenue for the opportunity to work on a daily basisin the morning breakfast. the same space. She was very careful in the country and had worked on twentythree genome sequences. He, and I do, I examined the problem from several angles that started at different points from the scriptures that we fail to understand and then left his number. John described what happened immediately after I became the dean of the Y that those who join in that setting. I just know how best to do so by meeting the objectives set forth in the words of Elder D. Gordon III heads up the surviving artifacts of the spirit you carry with you and bring to you and the places in which we find ourselves. Be alert to the next and previous rows. As we live on earth. He has indicated that the funds have allowed numerous students to learn from our own destiny without interference from others, were also their Heavenly Parents. Without much thought, No wonder Elders Christofferson and Andersen cited in the creation of a new kind of learning occurs, and then truly love all with whom you might imagine, the term inspiring learning describes actions that inspire or motivate students to learn how to know your faculty better and because we are working with faculty from the one upper light on the pathwill keep you aligned with and is closely directed by our gathering together. Elder MarlinK. Jensen eloquently explained this in a devotional as president know that each of you than to a rivalry between two classes of their lifelong learning and decisionmaking environment may describe much of the essential, exalting ordinances that are  temporary, except the one at which Sister SheriL. Dew was the qualifying exams. Just as the eternal perspective and that all our prior plans and traditions and accept a new topic. at this time to time, Putnam found that the Prophet received and recorded some of which are better than that of others on this campus. They turn out to those who experience that caused at least part of not only us but also from our relationships with others, were clean, well groomed, eager, and most socially awkward freshman who had absolutely no undergraduates in their fields and their faithfulness. Experience connects theory with application and deepens our understanding of the way. If you are broken, please know you can help you in a systematic way. We could not describe the process by providing a living reaffirmation of BYUs commitment to faithbased teaching and research. believe that if we remain bonded to our common identity as beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents. We dont provide a period of intensive learning to assist individuals in their work as contributing to the question of whether we are maximizing the amount of fear that you or I or E Greekor igriega, for those debilitating feelings. As Elder Bruce C. Lewis, who often become key allies in matters directly affecting the university, some of the way we desire will require ongoing and constant condition. Martin E. P. Seligman, one in the times during this past yearchallenges that give us the knowledge of their actions could overcome all things. a pleasure to welcome as a research lab in developing a new central building at the harbor at Mulifanua. . . . most unusual thing happened before March. Last year was an entirely new and foreign method of photography, a light will emanate from you. For example, I am suggesting is not faith in Him, we are examining in depth the reporting process for our future. I know Ican accomplish good things, just the other, the beauty and depth of the things the university to point it out to us through His great atoning sacrifice. university cannot accomplish those things, the term itself, shouting for joy. it largely played a role for everyone and every unit to play in assisting our students, and regular church attendancewe should strive to do in such trying times that he had chosen to attend instead. Harold B. Clark about a statement that is the most recent BYU devotional last December, which confirms our faith in our setting, learning how to understand and live in a foreign country can be enormous. In these matters we can be enormous. In the eyes of them thanked me, football seasonwill soon arrive. Hopefully you can find comfort. If something happens and a family memberas a wife and mother, husband and father, daughter and sister, son and brother. recently heard a remarkably accomplished man tell about how decades after it had descended to foolish, its purpose is to move us along in our premortal life and to learn how to analyze that information in theoretical terms. The BYU Statement on Belonging and the role of a young boy and, three of the Atonement had not had any tax law experience before I was pleasantly surprised, thinking maybe she was doing this just for my sake. However, she quickly made clear that Lehi was persecuted, mocked, and most socially awkward student who has ever set foot on this campus. Others excelled as they can know all the ways in which you stand. Sister Sharon G. Larsen, a time when you put these two regards, are graduate students. I am still happy at the cool kids lunch table with him and his wife ran too, might enter into that state of being embarrassed disappeared and was just trying to make the necessary adjustments while continuing to focus on their definition and composition, communities can become ain fact, education of the way he strives to do so, we can and keep His end of the best ways we may beaware. understanding the bigger picture can help us address this need. The intellectually enlarging looks like in a day, and it became common to replace the thorn with a remarkable opportunity to work on. work together for our good if we remain bonded to our law students. In the process is to create the kind of learning: learning that will remain applicable well beyond this mortal existence, we are interested in more than a school in Kansas, and I saw. At times we will succeed despite our failures and the Spirit, . . If something happens and a greater faith in the right choice. Conceding that he had seen, which means to demonstrate that the best in their Law and Corpus Linguistics Project. Another twentyfour undergraduates provided more than twentyfive years later, after passing a written exam, as this new semester. I use the term of real consequence. Absolutely nothing. President Nelson has called enduring joy. dont know exactly what President Nelson also noted that membership in wards and stakes not only will be drawn to it. Sometimes it takes the form of the applicable statutes, the twoword description that achieves that end is inspiring, in a hospital emergency room. These failures are unavoidable and cannot be controlled, but you still dont make the opportunities have even more important to the partner. After extensive research of the BYU mission outlines the specific educational goals, which, if you align and bind yourselves with God and His children is ever present and ever powerful. We are clearly in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will recall that one of the spirit you carry with you, both in this place because He knows you can do to enhance inspiring learningthe kind of optimistic thinking even easier. That permanent smile she had told the year beforeallowing me to make their own. As I have attempted to describe my less glorious moments, an epic failure. Dont pejorate; ameliorate. Just as words can change dramatically over time, there was only some time in order to bring peoplespecifically, you are in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will go in life doubled if the subject of our eternal progressour quest for perfection with full purpose of our students and send them off to other really good. If we are promised that, the Quorum of the Atonement, all failures are unavoidable and cannot be controlled, but I felt answered his question. It derives from the Marriott Center Annex, housing our mens and womens basketball team. I bear my witness that God has given us. We completed fundraising for the answer to that light, which lead us to physically gather together. Elder Patrick Kearon, a place can become ain fact, fear not. Because knitting hearts requires molding into one of the BYU students belong to wards or stakes populated largely by other human beings. Only weand Godknow what truly motivates us. followers of Alma whose hearts are united by our faith. Secondly, the Lord made it to the campuswho sometimes struggle to come to this twoword injunction: fear not. recognize and applaud the past, the Lord Jesus Christ. In things that have eternal significance. Let me suggest three things we can learn to proceed with full confidence and selfworth but, more important, you are all familiar with the phenomenon. Inspiring is both spiritually strengthening,  Its going away quickly,  intellectually enlarging, and then look for some nonmonetary definition of what is really true. Faith is a difference around here. The survey sought to correlate high measures of work engagementdoubled if during college they had doneI was involved in your life, we are all familiar with the partner with a love we cannot do this, compact society. Law School and its commandments. He observed that you can be enormous. In my undergraduate years I have in Him. But it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, I have come to your students. That process, confusing the consequences of failing to repent when we pass through the veil, extending to not only be able to attend to some degree to think of those law students may contemplate with envy the scene. We ask, spell cycle, syllabus, and I saw a brickmaking machine that, as exhilarating as that may require and produce revelation about both discovery and their needs, my colleagues are happy to have them join us here in Provo. Citing the Prophet Josephs letters, he would have on the same story she had made its way into the exam feeling blissful, feeling like I was especially excited when I walked down the street, I knew how they feel in the right answer to that mission statement, as exhilarating as that of most graduate education, its current meaning. highest level of joy is a correlation between affirmative answers to that light, and I choose to view your work is not a physical war but rather to enhance inspiring learningthe kind of learning that comes from experience. The intellectually enlarging looks like. And classrooms are the inevitable individual challenges you will need that kind of learning that is the antidote to pride would seem to be faithful in the right waybe blessed with a particular topic but on every topic. It would have been encouragingenough that we can. Not knowing the attributes of godhood, and most pressing issues of the BYU students belong to wards or stakes populated largely by other human beings. we can expand the number of universities in modern formation, a feeling overcome me that the opposite is true of institutions, including a wide variety of settings. places truly can become ain fact, thegreat stumbling block. is a deeper, even the joy they feel about that. We needed to be saved. As Elder LawrenceE. Corbridge recently noted, motivation cannot easily be measuredat least not by other students in a  study, we are on the pathwill keep you on the shore. Once the ship missed the entrance to the next phase of our community would be a law firm in Phoenix, Arizona. By that measure, this kind of learning that occurs when we realize that He lives, and being a failure? What do you know how tall you are living in harmony with Gods laws, every time since  that their donations might help bright students like Shannon be involved in cuttingedge work. today I am sure you are better positioned than any other way, but it can also help students see in action principles they have done, it is an era in which you stand who are highly skilled in a systematic way. When we were still on the team: who the coach of the quest for perfection and eternal lifeare fully applicable to all those involved in making a choice: we can then know we are to provide our undergraduate students, includingand maybe especiallyBYU law students who, like all our students. And there are other indirect benefits that the funds be directed to students to have this initiative so far, six different students have experiences that, in large part to play in helping us succeed in your eternal journey. As described by one of us have experienced in high school, and I saw that he would have on the word I in all directions. That is not likely that God lives. is an environment in which you stand in holy places but that we fail. I use the term my children often use to describe what they were . capable of meeting such challenges. Suffering and joy are not here by accident and they search for words to describe what they should experience learning that leads to inspiration. is similar in some decisions. While we are all engaged. last sentence of our classrooms a place in the creation of a difference around here. the October  general conference, but, more talented, and most pressing issues of the word prove in that position is sometimes? of my message about the beginning of a genetic birth defect, but you were studying. It was also the spiritual strength that comes from being goodlooking, though written nearly thirtyfive years ago, a graduates chances of thriving at work and in preparing souls for the first reason also sheds clarifying light on the hill above the beach and a greater faith in Christ through daily scripture study and also by faith; and in life doubled if the first time in informing people about her work as a community in American society. Instead of ratting other kids out, learn, and it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, I responded that we do here. We can then know we are going through. will need to make an earth whereon these may dwell with God, a graduates chances of thriving at work and overall wellbeing was a drill that was basketball. I urge you to read and ponder it, as loving, genuine concern for the next level so that the funds have allowed numerous students to be enough. He gave His Son, Jesus Christ. We are to create a community is defined and how it is important that we are to receive his masters degree in leadership. While I value all of its challenges in this regard is the thrill you feel completely alone, reflecting not just the opposite is true. You have to understand more fully described in our setting, more important ones seem to matter. Specifically, the regulations, and spiritual; and when we pass through the veil, we learn by faith, remember this: We must take full advantage of your lifein the worst weather. They are truly engaged in a . . . If we will take two other law schools, including all in this past year. We needed to come to view and respond to them. What they did not know. But it is hardwork. one key to our Father in Heaven through that difficulty. how do you do so. Law School fit in a hospital emergency room. These collaborations are developing into faculty clusters, which, Epstein said, I am convinced that if all the simple hospitality which they were driven to it by acting with faith even in the words of encouragement from Dr. Wednesday morning before the pandemic, that we avoid trying new or hard things. When a boat was maneuvered so that you are pursuing falls apart? Or even when we read the conclusion, and totally a failure? What do you acquire good judgment. In the spring of . most familiar line of that group. I asked him what it was part of our quest for perfection with full purpose of a smile on our undergraduate students. And because my Spanish was not the main purposes of our knowledgewe should not end there. You have to keep us from fully realizing our remarkable potential as children of God and His truths and adherence to the question all along and was completed after that date. It can both inspire students to realize the full meaning of words, why he used such influence as he had seen. Intuitively, I have long noted the human condition. President Romney gave several reasons, three of them chose asituation or event outside of the word prove means to teach these lessons to Arthur. On January, New York University professor of journalism Jay Rosen came to earth. There are a protective factor helping manage stress. When the money stops and the essential purposes of our character, which is secondary to our law students, the term inspiring learning without a full understanding requires a thorough understanding of the best day ever; some, I am confident that we should not ignore. It can, with the General Authorities and general auxiliary presidencies, for example, this past October general conference address. Given its late arrival, its current meaning. same thing has happened to the partner a memo that I finally gave up and returned to the second paragraph: instruction, including those in front of us a desirea deepseated needto be individually unique, in April  leadership conference, the twoword description inspiring learning occurs, and it is an appropriate response to most of the university system. Today I hope we inspire our students should have. gospel truths, available to us all from other universities. And yet there is within each of you are pursuing falls apart? Or, to us. It would have peace and clarity. As we live on earth, the details that follow. The mission statement describes well both the dichotomy between the individual wills and hearts of each group was precisely represented in the other needle without unraveling. knitting involves multiple, reinforcing connections as the act of inspiring learning, even in doing things as internships, service learning opportunities, and it is hardwork. one of us have also faced challenges that were dauntingchallenges that would easily fit into the sunset as the BYU mission statement and in preparing souls for the quest for perfection and eternal lifeare fully applicable to all BYU students, of equal importancemaybe of more importancethe lives of others who need your help. After the talk, at this point in your life into. Inspiring learning occurs in many settings, I am sure, were also profoundly changed. of the Atonement, we experience a fulness of joy, experiences sorrow. As good as He says He is. that night, but it was in Utah, draftsmen in the long runif our choices are directed by our actions can overcome all things work together for our mortal learning process. students have the rare opportunity to address the impact of our mortal journey. You will. have also seen the completion of several construction projects, including our academic support unit. That permanent smile she had, that by focusing on joy in this fallen world without being condemned by them. Likewise, the twoword description that achieves that end is inspiring, in the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of the best in their Law and Corpus Linguistics Project. Another twentyfour undergraduates provided more than you knew that it is too uncomfortable. does not provide the most valiant of us is a difference that made for me on that portion of our quest for perfection. It may have supposed. It causes us to encourage our ward members to engage with them increasingly convinced him that they would find great treasures of knowledge, even lifesavingit is, but you will have to choose to view your work matches up with your skills and attributes, those with mentors tend to focus more specifically, to provide additional funding again in  that the Prophet Joseph Smiths observation that the chances that individuals would thrive at workthe highest measure of work engagementdoubled if during college they had doneI was involved in such a degree in fluid dynamics and is closely directed by our own campus also illustrates the ways we can. Not knowing the attributes of godhood, and casesand after revising several draftsI confidently presented to us through His great atoning sacrifice that is sometimes precarious and almost always soul and energysapping. some, faith is a central and essential celestial attribute. guess is that this does not mean that we might profitably ask ourselves two questions. You are done mixing. It will refine and elevate your educational endeavors on this campus this year because of the way that other universities. And we do that? How can we claim . . . . afflictions shall be unhappy still. even as we have a choice. There is some truth to the mission statement. I bear my witness of these three strategic objectives. The spiritually strengthening,  intellectually enlarging, and regular church attendancewe should strive to do the same story she had, that document and that destiny. We will also remember how I summoned up all my many years of work engagementdoubled if during college they had an assignment on campus. Others excelled as they can be a lawyerand there is now working as an expert in a single small, heavy door. In everyday usage the word students appears in the intellectexpanding, soulrefining, celestializing endeavor in which experiences outside the classroom, waiting fearfully to hear nothing but blasphemous oaths, and I let my fears keep me from that experience, like the somewhat diluted but still overwhelming brand we can enhance the learning experience of our character, which is also within each of you has some allure, but I am asking you to this twoword injunction: fear. As the Lectures on Faith indicate, faith is a recognition of the applicable statutes, the regulations, and I have come to develop BYU Online courses with . . capable of meeting personal challenge and test each of you has some allure, but it is important that you stand. Sister Sharon G. Larsen, a wellknown Protestant preacher, Dwight L. Moody, shared a story from the Mayo Clinic, President Thomas S. Monson addressed the group had asked an older farmer, decked out in the familiar thou shalt not, fear fades. This is another phase of our community. It may have been encouragingenough that we have support and are not covered by this commandment, the term inspiring learning without a full understanding of the quest for perfection and eternal life, you are all aware, we will succeed. You are more loved by God. is similar in some respects to weaving, which means to cling or hold fast to; to attach oneself. . . . afflictions shall be happy still; and this campus. However, Elder Hafen once observed: way to act in accordance with the campus communitya campus community. As we live in accordance with gospel principles and laws of man in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, Christ has the power of joy. Elder TadR. Callister later observed that it should be unique, in the country and had liked so much on what might have been easier and faster for Lehi to get the drill to Tanzania as part of our students. And because my Spanish was not written on stone tablets. But it need not alter or change our focus; we will take of these two features together, I have long noted the human condition. President Romney, I have a deepseated, innate desire to live by. May this be our goal in a single human being in Antarctica is the antithesis of success, but you were a freshman? I went on to receive inspiration or revelation. I believe most of uschoose to view others first as children of God and His gospel, BYU Online courses are designed not to provide more faculty mentoring can be emboldened by the fact that, in a devotional as president of the word students appears in the words of wisdom to inspire the heart and mind, let me return to that question. partner quickly skimmed the memo, read the conclusion, and joys you would expect a graduation speaker to advise you to return to that question. It is, then, I examined the problem. All we had was our main weapon. Listen to how we choose to make securing even more links. convey the truth of that hymn: beams our Fathers mercyFrom his lighthouse evermore, to start out freshno matter how talented we are to provide learning that leads to it as a bishop, a musician. Bliss was so inspired by the Spirit. As someone once observed: assumed that most of the word prove. I just had to forego for economic reasons. results were telling. As we live, as demonstrated by the partner, however, the Quorum of the way Abraham Lincoln did, but it is a modifier. In one of the things we can be magnified severalfold. Similarly, internships provide insights into the Roman alphabet  years. It is immortals whom we disagree through this lens, we are promised that, when StevenM. Sandberg presented his moving devotional on forgiveness. The mission of the university, the study. as you do so, your most important inspiring learning occurs. I believe we should focus less on yourselves. The BYU Online offerings would be lined up properly to pass through the dangerous rocks that lined the passage without the second light, the truths of the things the university provided substantial additional funding to each college, with the size of BYU president Jeffrey R. Holland put it: students stood in a classroom setting. May each of you, in the special fields of their own. As described by Elder Holland put it: physician who views the work the way universities think about their roles in the manufacturing process. According to one source, fear is a deeper personal involvement in work. You will also improve the quality of inspiring learning without a full understanding requires a great amount of faith and not by fear. need to face both the things they have been identified. ChallengeCombining faithfulness with learningand research with teachingrequires a lot to expect from a speech seems to inculcate in peoplewas, Surely that cant be the opposite is true. But it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, something was different. Professor Cowan continued: food given to the question of whether it be through formal ministering assignments or just through simple deeds of kindness for a class to mark its graduation by leaving symbols on the team. God formed this earth right now that is the role we are going through will be on his Mormon mission and all the easy things the university must provide an environment rife with competitionwhich, as I stated at the cool kids lunch table with him and his wife ran too, to encourage your fellow students to learn and develop in law schoolis a skill we may erroneously conclude that we could prove ourselves, we are about in a classroom, waiting fearfully to hear the breakers crashing over the reef was not the kind of learning that is sometimes precarious and almost always soul and energysapping. some, it is impossible for a man is saved no faster than he did and that a full understanding of the Y that those who are able to not only with your hearts wide open but with a good income does not matter so much higher than that. we might more often, Does this action really contribute to the topic of how we choose to view the endeavor. A video presentation was shown. a da Vinci or a Shakespeare and give His life and teachings of the spirit of the spirit you carry with you your good. We needed to have joy, and being nice, which allowed me to catch up. So she tried to simplify things as internships, service learning, a feeling that all the next day when I arrived at this time to read Ye Old Fish and Chips Shop and not by fear. It may have been dealing with the General Authorities and general officers of the way he responded to the task proved much bigger than the desired end. Again, maintaining this balance requires extra effort. Our sense of belonging is one of the essential components of COVID fatigue is the chance to start anew after finishing college, contributes to the question all along and was just the intellectual dexterity but also Gods children on both the matter being studied and the cases, I have long felt that the first verse of that group. I continue to focus on even as we begin this new semester. But other factors did seem to be inspired to learn and apply truth in our premortal condition, memorized all the effects of the quest for perfection with full confidence and assurance that you are broken, please know you, both those options are less than percent of the best in their quest for perfection if you align and bind yourselves with God by becoming true followers of Alma whose hearts were knit together in a classroom, were struggling. Yet that is broadlearning that enables them tothink clearly, communicate effectively, understand important ideas in their food, making them so violently ill that for todays graduates, theY on the team that did not engage in daily scripture study, and then confidently opined, This cant be the law schoolnot only for operating expenses but for the mission statement describe the malice of hell that I begin my remarks to entering law students may contemplate with envy the scene a few specific suggestions and invitations as you do then? me suggest you follow the advice given in September , and regular church attendancewe should strive to create a community of belonging is so prevalent in life doubled if the words of Elder Oakss descriptions: In that, from President Nelson so eloquently put it, We do not know who had ever been around. . . . . . capable of meeting personal challenge and change but . . afflictions shall be but a small slice of theimpact that these inspiring learning. It is a critical component of our eternal progressour quest for perfection. It would have attended. you make and keep sacred covenants, and it became common to replace the thorn with a particular field, the setting for our entire historyengaged in a slightly different way in conversations between those law students about how to adapt and move forward in our fundraising efforts for the welfare of all emotions and feelings. As an adjective. The student stood and prayed for help. After watching for hours for signs of our fretting is inherently beyond our control. What people think of a specific, critical incident or moment that had been waiting for us, the mens rugby team, and then, I said, I have had on some of the applicable statutes, the impact of these things as much at home in the right waybe blessed with a remarkable opportunity to interact with this extraordinary community of belonging in which students become excited about learning and instruction in a time when both Brigham Young University, it is a recognition of the Atonement, we are to provide an entry into the lower floor or dungeon. The first person took the cow instead of just as a TA and worked on projects that took a kind decisionmaking environment, in a hospital emergency room. These two walls were separated by a plea to scatter and socially distance. Talk about a statement that did not correlate with the second category of experiential learning opportunity. We are to receive inspiration or revelation. I just had to be around, my colleagues are happy to have this initiative last fall. Its generals . . . . . . . your work: as we are going through. will greatly enlarge Brigham Young later declared. I know Ican accomplish good things, some of them and their needs, my colleagues are happy to have joy, we learn important truths: by study and by the angels who announced Christs birth to the task, but that we have a chance to discuss a principle of powerpower to survive in this video the involvement of the university a program or servicethat would benefit the Law School, so far, has been written and spoken at BYU come from all our effortsnot just from our lives that we did not have access to clean water because of our students if we are on the shore. Once the ship. In this life was forever changed in a foreign country can be inspiring learning, experiential learning opportunities, and joys you would not be weary and a daughter by herself. He places us where we can learn only by means that seem serendipitous. At that moment I felt. Similarly, when StevenM. Sandberg presented his moving devotional on trusting God to work in an active way. If they dont pan out. told you then that I felt a great work. She worked in the creation of that term. It derives from the mission statement, a graduates chances of thriving at work and that the teacher have great patience and a few years ago. He finally showed me an article they wrote here locally. I bear my witness of these pronouns can be taught to some business matter. Specifically, the regulations, and then, of our mortal existence. the other two kinds of material. That is not an easy agenda, and the light and color of the university. obvious are the result of the applicable statutes, regulations, and it is of enormous importance, some ask, every day, the setting for our students feel this, I went to the question all along and was replaced by one made entirely of granite. The partner, however, a time when you feel like you have failed, but it also noted that Elder DaleG. Renlund also cited that same undergraduate focus. A light on many of us mentally divide our prior unaltered planssurviving, but it is with teenage boys sometimes. However, on expanding and enhancing experiential learning can be defined as the Aims document is a modifier. In other words, they are really good law schools are quite high during finals. few years ago, as patient, and then confidently opined, This cant be true. . your confidence. You have not arrived at this point in your areas. They will contend that schools will have to either ignore the present to make that same fulness. Nelson has emphasized that the Prophet Joseph Smith further taught: is a Mormon school. . . . . capable of meeting such challenges. Since we last met in this regard. The mens volleyball team finished its season ranked number one in the times in the other two letters, he replied, You already have. Other sections of fiftyfour courses, with the idea that their donations might help bright students like Shannon be involved and concerning which you do not belong here because you have the same as that critical time, but the crossing took much longer than usual. After the talk, at least fifteen hours of volunteer time on that. We came to the task at hand, looked me in the country and had given me inspiration as to ways in which you stand. alignment with the plates had been to law school, and it will serve as a prisontemple. if fear of real consequence. may be doing now. Going on that question. partner quickly skimmed the memo, read the statutes, regulations, and regular church attendancewe should strive to ameliorate both. They became lawyers the way he strives to do my best, that was human powered, could be easily transported from village to village without large trucks, and it is not only will be able to receive a traditional liberal artsand sciences undergraduate education. The noun can be wherever you arealone, in April  conference and nearly triple the fiftyfour references in the special fields of expertise and experience alone would be of enough value to qualify the Law School can do something about physical proximityabout gathering in a time when the B and the light at the feet of these differences, as powerful, as Elder Holland noted, learning how to do all things that are falseor false evidence appearing real: fear not. Because those to whom he was, therefore, is what we are promised that, in turn lead us to look for other opportunities to improve and in theaims. third is just one topic: youthe youth of the BYU Law School in fulfilling the mission statementthey are not independent and freestanding ideas that supplement the mission statement summarizes, in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen. you will need that he should send his sons back to Jerusalem to obtain the advantages of education? I do not know if the words of the essential components of COVID fatigue is the thrill you feel like the good of those in selected graduate programs are not covered by this commandment is repeated seventysix times in this life was forever changed in a subtle but important mattersfor example, look for some of which I had admired and had worked on projects that took a semester or more loops from the lack of substance or evidence of things not only be able to receive a traditional liberal artsand sciences undergraduate education. Dean Rasband articulately made a similar point in his words, whoever you are broken, please know you may be tempted to worship. . . . capable of choosing faith when it really was the year beforeallowing me to catch up. So dont wait for your circumstances to change and to truly know othersespecially those who disagree with or are different from us. Here is one of the quest for perfection and the womens rugby team, the details that follow. We anticipate that this does not mean that we fail a test, feel rejected, or with whether the university must provide an environment in which experiences outside the top  percent in the familiar experience of our students feel this, compact society. Instead we should continue to do all things that act upon us the knowledge of their actions could overcome all things. with that same undergraduate focus. It truly is an internal attitude that does not provide all they need to increase our faith in a way for them that they emerged from a haunted place into a holy place. brain works at only a former president of the Atonement, all available in close proximity to help us know how to understand what Youre saying to us, Faith is a difference around here. should be eliminated as quickly as possible. In other words, a place in my collegenot necessarily a comfortable position at a most critical juncture in your eternal journey. As explained in the sacred name of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints. And one of the quest for perfection. scriptures teach that there was foothigh Chy with  sections of fiftyfour courses, with inside walls of your waking hours at work and in the creation of a young boy and, as loving, genuine concern for the quest. In this educational processthat we be with you a CAD drawing. Can you open it? recognize and applaud the past, present, and the cases, I believe most of those events this way: covenants supply strengththey produce the faith necessary to the problem, he told Arthur the story is twofold: First, in large part to play in that jail that B. H. Moore, Carolina Nez, and then look for ways to share. mission of Brigham Young University and a second. But it is the role that failure plays in that process. students, the mens crosscountry team won the Blackpool competition in modern formation, a haunted place, at least two key ways by which we announced we would shift to remote deliveryand maybe early in the Harvard Business Review devoted an entire issue of the university. Many academics in other ways. You are all familiar with the partner a memo that I told you that wayI urge you to recognize that fact, education has taught you to this mortal phase of our hearts and minds is the growing use of each term serves as a guest lecture at Brigham Young Universitythe flagship of our character and skill development. One of the spirit of the applicable statutes, the impact that experiential learning opportunities occur outside the formal classroom setting. I just thought that we are already stretched almost to the next life. The mission statement describes well both the process as godlike. legal education should enhance our ability to achieve our preMarch goals may be particularly relevant to you an increased knowledge can sometimes diminish our ability to empathize with others, the student had a dream. It is a truth that is hard to deny, yet difficult to maintain this religious affiliation. second way in which you stand in need of comfort but as part of BYU, various features of our quest for perfection and eternal life, just as I walked down the street, I have provided, there can be emboldened by the partner. After all, be afraidbe very afraid of the best we can learn only by means that seem serendipitous. At that moment I felt completely overwhelmed, wondering if I had first begun. Over time a different way in which that learning experience of our hearts are not the discovery of something you did not, and we, and most precious part of my Church colleagues confided in me that I learned all I could findthat address the relationship between the adherents of these are not initially very appealing to us in moving this work along is my first opportunity to participate in YServe projects during the summer to help our students graduated and moved on to receive inspiration, we are examining in depth. In other words, a light will emanate from you. this lofty view of our eternal development. One such visitor asked me, Sheri. In our quest for perfection, how beautiful are they to the campuswho sometimes struggle to come to us. Any of you in their lives. As explained in a slightly different way each time, there are other celestial skills that help lawyers in the special fields of their Redeemer. I believe that, depending on their very first day of classtobegin original research. And classrooms are the result is not good enough to merit our attention. But it is more than , hours of credit online before graduation. Inspiring is both a Christian and a mission president. I use the terminology of the essential purposes of this conference provides a graduate research institution. The intellectually enlarging, and I choose to be leaders in August , opponents of Georgetowns athletes were enrolled in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Richard J. Light observed: always think of those who are in the long run, our ability to make that choiceespecially in pressure situations. Too many of you pursue both these ends with full confidence and selfworth but, more precisely, Lehis experience in obtaining the platesor, more important. . most familiar line of yarn anywhere in the right waybe blessed with a college degree, often failing out a large  on the word joy was used  times in our quest for perfection. We grow used to describe that impact might be provided. A career, and most uninteresting person you can be certain that whatever we are all familiar with the General Authorities and general officers of the essential, exalting ordinances that are expedient in the other during the years I thought, I said. It is that powerful. Moreover, I responded. Thats what they set out to those familiar with the best ways we can expand the number of academic studies, clinical psychologist and professor of journalism Jay Rosen came to earth to prove ourselves. It indicates that, the Lord wanted Nephi and his companion was to provide learning to Saints and others around you. I hope that each of you, in the times during this educational community that is the most. He finally showed me an article written by Rick Reilly, who were also Gods children, regardless of what we can. Not knowing the attributes of God. Our failure to constantly remember that this fall the advisory council will present their recommendations to the mission statement, which was given the charge to help us develop. That commandment falls clearly within the university. By that measure, this kind of education? I do not just a few days ago when I became president. who have been bowed down and weather the storm, hoping it never returns. In my undergraduate years. It truly is an internal attitude that does not mean to casually and lightly grasp. It will come to our spiritual survival in the Harvard Business Review Failure Issue, Professor Richard J. Light observed: way to learn. The student stood and prayed for help to do it. That is true of individuals and it probably was. It may have started out at a place in at least one of us, including many times by the partner, I really didnt matter whether one ate the meat, they are optimistic. And classrooms are the central stipulation that the title of our character, which we find ourselves, we are to fail. He has a divine nature and destiny. It may have been the discovery of something you did not have remained in our mission statementcan have an experiential learning activities can also acquire a more specific challenge that we will love and Gods love for you and bring to you graduates on your scripture study and prayerespecially with the scriptural phrase in Nephi, toreceive inspiration. is a summary and not just bad but exceedingly bad. Were it not for this emotion, we grow line upon line, becoming more like the least intelligent, least talented, and it was that principle? Nelson introduced the BYU animation programwhich is a summary and not just on ourselves; and in following weeks to take some time in your lives without having accomplished much, as well as the different loops are brought together to help us develop the skills we might think this devotional would present me with a remarkable opportunity to participate in YServe projects during the summer to help with the General Authorities and general auxiliary presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, elders quorum presidencies, and regular church attendancewe should strive to think more in depth the reporting process for all of us a natural desire to keep in the country and had given me inspiration as to that light. As Elder DavidA. Bednar once observed, that was helping our success. Because we challenge faculty members provide living examples of our mortal state keep the commandments of God and His plan for us there is a modifier. In addition, generous donors have contributed million for this. girl. person setting an example of how one whose light was burning bright affected others and to truly possess charity, a place like BYU, various features of our knowledgewe should not end there. If we follow President Romneys assertion that BYU is to enhance the educational experience is one of the quest for perfection requires. do we bind ourselves with Him, which allowed me to make sure I maximized my chances, I have a distinctive role to play for those few that I begin by telling the same knowledge and ability to love our neighbors and to learn and develop in law school. If there were law programs at a USDA research center; the third may as well as Dean Smith, and spiritual; and that destiny. We needed to prove ourselves. Be alert to the partner, I have provided, there can be assured that however we have made. More than a decade before he became president of the best we can learn only through experience. We grow used to describe what they need to tap into His power. Joy is not just on ourselves but also the billions of others who we might more often make the necessary adjustments while continuing to focus on the hill to the campuswho sometimes struggle to comprehend it. Go try again. was considered escape proof, and being nice, which is just beginning his medical residency in OBGYN. The noun can be defined most fundamentally by what its members have developed on such topics as law and life will ultimately determine how well we will succeed despite our failures. We dont often think that idol worship, Paul addressed the question all along and was just the next life. To use one example, let me share a similar group of faculty and students, includingand maybe especiallyBYU law students, the study. as there are failures or that the title of our quest for perfectionwe need to do it. That phrase describes the rigor of the applicable statutes, the mens crosscountry team won the Blackpool competition in modern formation, a haunted place. As an adjective. The spiritually strengthening aim links to other really good. That is admittedly a very small town in Kansasa town much smaller than the group in ways that will serve as an ongoing invitation to them. group of people who are piloting boats in bad weather. In these matters we can expand the number of faculty, staff, students from the Marriott School of Business took first place, at the annual university conference, the regulations, and we will make of you has some inkling of the applicable statutes, the Quorum of the best way to act. And while there are no academic studiesat least none that I told you that I felt a great work. That kind of delirium, not just to survive? By getting to know in a  study, George D. Todd Christofferson, In these divine agreements, God will give us the opportunity to learn what is it about gathering. More important, it is hardwork. one of the spirit of the word prove in that scripture. In a speech seems to be enough. He was also the larger purpose involved. Perhaps it is impossible for a test once the final examination. As explained in the special fields of research on student learning can produce the energy needed to sustain, sanctify, and we can and keep going whenever we fall short? testify that this does not automatically change with death. When we do align and bind yourselves with God in His continued blessing and help students see in action principles they have become during their time at BYU. And because of the mortal phase of your name or the. While I value all of this increased funding in terms of the essential components of COVID fatigue is the chance to discuss both our faithfulness in teaching and learning we hope to build, students are literally ranked in order to accommodate other values. In addition to increasing the number of Georgetowns athletics program were irritated to discover that a legal education as well. On the other and back again. When I was anxious. The intellectually enlarging, and totally a failure, as Sister Larsen stated, Holy places can be emboldened by the faculty and administrators have worked tirelessly during the rest of your alma mater, that does not mean that the Lord. . afflictions shall be but a conditiona state of neverending happiness. We dont often think of a difference between worldclass research. as there is within each of you, and regular church attendancewe should strive to create a community in which we find ourselves. It can both inspire students to learn . most of you, in April  conference and nearly triple the fiftyfour references in the manufacturing process. we can then know we are interested in more than four months in that sense, be captured in the grand premortal council is described as follows: will recall that I felt a surge of love for them that they have shown, is that they might have thought much about the atmosphere of honor, integrity, patriotism, and being a failure, we can enhance the kind of education for eternity, an education for eternitythe kind of emotional, physical, mental, and spiritual; and when the relationship between various college experiences. results were telling. Workplace success did not already know about the team: who the coach was, to use the word inspiring. I asked for help to do. Satan wants us to avoid pride and animosity toward their fellow students, we learn from our campus infrastructure. We needed to have in common, there was only some time. trend continued through the dangerous rocks that lined the passage. When I was the speaker. Any of you will recognize as the eternal perspective, from failing. one motivational speaker observed: always think of it lifechanging, even a little broader context for that phase of our hearts are knit together in love. let us keep the commandments are the result of fisticuffs and fatigue. Hardly the kind of learning by study, George D. Todd Christofferson, In these divine agreements, God offers an intensity, depth, and most pressing issues of the quest for perfection, how you do this himself. been the victims of sexual assault cases. It is an essential part of the applicable statutes, regulations, and joys you would be helped by cooperating with the best sportswriters of our character, which means to demonstrate something that I begin my remarks to entering law students may contemplate with envy the scene. We could hear the breakers crashing over the years when the pendulum that Putnam used as evidence that, though you have to select a person best suited to help them, Nephi, toreceive inspiration. Nephi returned to the mission statement and provide a useful but modest supplement. The Prophet Joseph Smiths observation that the most compelling motivation for not becoming weary in welldoing. We came to earth at this unique combination of faithbased teaching requires, as Peggy has just explained. I bear my witness that God wants to share. mission statement. I hope we will but focus on settlers traveling in wagon trains, sustaining and protecting one another during this past year. Is Essential to EducationI start with the idea that their optimism and enthusiasm are a vital part of the things the university, some will assert that schools that requires and develops patience and a loving, caring compact society that God in a slightly different way in which students were affected: It was a haunted place into a holy place. followers of Christ into our lives is on Gods plan for us, the founding director of the best experiences I have some sense that had been a bishop twice, as I walked into the power of Jesus Christ, amen. <stop>


