During his final address as principal of Brigham Young Academy, Karl G. Maeser gave this wise counsel:
There are two periods in a man’s labors when circumstances seem to dictate . . . the advisability of making as few words as possible: they are at the beginning and at the end of his work.
George Washington apparently shared the same sentiment, as his second inaugural address consisted of only 135 words.
Following the example of these outstanding leaders, I will be relatively brief.
I emphasize “relatively” because I am, by training, a lawyer—one of a group of people who often speak as if they were paid by the word.
So don’t expect me to match Washington’s brevity.
I want you to get your money’s worth.
Let me begin with expressions of appreciation, starting with my wife, Peggy, who has not only stood by my side but has also often propped me up as we have shared so many wonderful adventures these past thirty-six years.
I think it is safe to say that she did not envision that we would ever be in this position when she agreed to marry me. But no one has been more supportive or had more impact on my success than has she.
I also express appreciation to the members of the board of trustees, whose confidence in me bolsters my own confidence.
We are truly blessed to be led by inspired men and women whose lives of consecration and service provide such clear examples of what we hope our students become.
Finally, I thank those who have sacrificed so much to make BYU the outstanding university that it is, including especially the twelve individuals who have preceded me as leaders of this institution.
I am particularly indebted to the past five—Presidents Oaks, Holland, Lee, Bateman, and Samuelson—each of whom has had a profound impact not only on this university but also on me personally.
I will never feel comfortable being considered in the same category as these remarkable men, but I will always feel grateful for the extraordinary institutional leadership and personal mentoring they have provided.
As a result of the efforts of these outstanding leaders and the prophets who have guided them through the decades, the direction of Brigham Young University is firmly set.
It is clearly stated in our mission statement.
We are “to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life” by providing “a period of intensive learning” that includes not just “the arts, letters, and sciences” but also “the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.”
What some consider to be a dubious effort to demonstrate “that faith in the Almighty can accompany and enrich scholarship in the secular” is, as President Gordon B. Hinckley observed, “more than an experiment [at BYU].
It is an accomplishment.” We have posted our colors to that mast and are fully committed to that cause with a faculty and student body who are better prepared than ever to achieve that goal.
Given the clear directionprovided by our mission statement, the question for us is how we can best move this important work forward at this time.
My answer is simple: by going to the mountains.
One of the first things that many visitors to this university notice is the presence of the majestic mountains that rise dramatically to the east of our campus.
The program and posters for this inauguration contain a painting of one of those mountains—Y Mountain, as it is known.
A rendering of that mountain is also on the back side of the medallion that was just placed around my neck.
I chose that particular feature as a kind of personal symbol for my tenure as president.
I did so in part because of the iconic block Y on that mountain.
As I explained to the faculty, staff, and administration at our recent annual university conference, the block Y can remind us of the unique education that we are to provide to our students—one that is broad, deep, spiritual, and character building.
But the large block Y is only part of the reason I chose Y Mountain as a symbol.
I also chose it because it is a mountain.
And mountains are good symbols of the kind of educational process that I hope occurs here.
The link between education and mountains was observed by Henry David Thoreau more than 150 years ago.
After spending time in the mountains near Williams College in western Massachusetts, Thoreau stated:
It would be no small advantage if every college were . . . located at the base of a mountain, as good at least as one well-endowed professorship. . .  Some will remember, no doubt, not only that they went to the college, but that they went to the mountain.
Thoreau’s observation was not just a plea to include physical activity as part of a well-rounded curriculum.
For Thoreau, mountains were places where people could be “elevated and . . . etherealized.”
Etherealize is not a word we use often.
It means “to refine, exalt, or spiritualize (something).” Mountains are thus locations where people can be enlightened, uplifted, and changed.
The learning process to which we are committed should do the same.
It should be education that elevates and etherealizes.
That doesn’t exactly roll off the tongue, so I don’t expect it to catch on as a phrase here.
But it describes well the kind of education I hope we provide at Brigham Young University in the coming years, and I hope the mountains that surround us will be reminders of that aspiration.
The general pattern for this type of learning process can be seen by reviewing what the scriptures teach about the role mountain settings play in God’s interaction with His children.
First, mountains are places of instruction—places to learn new things.
It was on the mountain that Nephi received instruction on how to build a ship,8 a task he had never engaged in previously.
And the brother of Jared came to understand new ways of lighting ships while “upon the top of the mount.”
Similarly, our classrooms, labs, offices, and other settings in which learning occurs must be places of instruction at the highest level.
Students and faculty alike should ascend high enough in their disciplines to think new thoughts and to find new ways to make things better.
That will require strenuous effort.
As President James E. Faust observed when addressing law students:
Do not expect your professor . . . to concentrate his lessons out of the scriptures, although occasionally he may wish to do so. His obligation is to teach you the secular rules of . . . law. . . . Your obligation is to learn the rules of law. . . . The whisperings of the Holy Spirit will no doubt help you, but you must learn the rules . . . using Churchill’s phrase, by “blood, sweat, and tears.”
You see, climbing mountains is hard work.
Second, mountains are places of spiritual communication and revelation.
On more than one occasion the Savior went to the mountain to pray, including before He called His apostles.
The grand revelation in which God provided “an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof” to Moses was given “in the mount.” Spiritual insights often come in mountain settings.
In like manner, we must go to the mountains spiritually if we are to obtain an elevated and ethereal education.
It is not enough to gain learning by study; we must also live our lives in such a way that we—both students and faculty—are able to receive inspiration directly from God.
That requires adherence to both the spirit and letter of the Honor Code—which was designed not just to distinguish us from other universities but to prepare us for elevated forms of learning.
Finally, mountains are places of transfiguration—places where individuals are transformed and changed in significant ways.
Moses was visibly different after he had spoken with the Lord in the mountain.
And one elevated place in the Holy Land is known as the Mount of Transfiguration because of the increased light that emanated from the Savior’s countenance when He ascended there with some of His apostles.
Likewise, the education we provide here should change the students in significant ways.
In the long run, the learning process will not be complete unless it becomes ingrained in their character, unless it becomes part of who they are.
We need to provide an education that allows our students not just to learn new things and to experience spiritual insights but to become different, better people—to be etherealized, if you will.
So that is the kind of education we aspire to provide: the type of life-changing education that can take an inexperienced and insecure young man from the coal mines of Carbon County—whose sole and futile aspiration growing up was to be a pro basketball player and who never dreamed of being a university professor—and prepare that kind of individual intellectually and spiritually to become, by some unlikely miracle, the president of one of the greatest universities in America.
Elevated and etherealized indeed.
It is no coincidence that Brigham Young University was established in this mountain location.
It is a partial fulfillment of prophecy proclaimed by Isaiah more than 2,500 years ago.
Speaking at the inauguration of President Dallin H. Oaks, President Harold B. Lee stated:
Brigham Young University, led by its president, must never forget its role in bringing to reality the ancient prophecy—to build the mountain of the Lord’s house in the tops of the mountains, so great and so glorious that all nations may come to this place and be constrained to say, “Show us your way that we may walk therein.” (See Isaiah 2:2–3.)
As we ascend to the tops of the mountains in these ways as a university, we will discover that new peaks lie ahead.
As imposing as Y Mountain may seem from its base, it is not the tallest mountain to the east of campus. As you reach the summit of that mountain, you realize there are higher mountains behind it. And so it is for us. As we elevate ourselves intellectually, spiritually, and in character-building ways, we will encounter new and exciting challenges and opportunities that we have not seen before. As President Spencer W. Kimball explained some thirty years ago:
It should be obvious to us all that the ultimate future of BYU is partially hidden from our immediate view.
Until we have climbed the hills just ahead, we cannot glimpse what lies beyond.
And the hills ahead are higher than we think. We cannot be transported over them without meeting demanding challenges. . . . You will not always be able to see the future, but by drawing close to our Heavenly Father, you will be guided.
So, to the mountains we go. The climb will be challenging, but it will also be exhilarating, elevating, and, yes, ethereal.
May we move ever upward in that endeavor is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

I extend my warmest congratulations and best wishes to each of the graduates today.
Graduation is properly a time of celebration—a time to rejoice in the success you have all achieved in earning your degree.
It is also properly a time to look forward to what lies ahead—that is in part why we call this ceremony a commencement.
Many of you will go immediately into your first post-college full-time job.
Others will head to graduate school. Some will dedicate themselves to the full-time pursuit of raising children.
Each of these new adventures will likely be challenging, stimulating, and, in a few cases, close to all consuming—in ways that may cause you to lose perspective.
As you begin this next phase of your life, especially the majority of you who will eventually spend most of your waking hours in a career outside the home, I ask you to reflect on the words of Os Guinness, who astutely observed that, in today’s society,
work takes up so many of our waking hours that our jobs come to define us and give us our identities.
We become what we do.
The world would often teach us that we are what we do.
It does not take long in most social gatherings to realize this.
One of the first questions that is asked when meeting a new person in a professional setting is “What do you do?” The answer to that question not only determines the subject and length of the ensuing conversation but also often creates the identity of the respondent from that point on.
Guinness urges us to not fall into the trap of defining ourselves by our jobs but instead to view our jobs—indeed, our entire lives—as a calling and to choose our jobs and how we fulfill them by determining who we are.
In his words:
Calling reverses [the world’s] thinking. . . . Instead of, “You are what you do,” calling says: “Do what you are.”
I urge you to consider this concept as you move ahead with your lives, because who you are is extraordinary—“beloved . . . son[s] or daughter[s] of heavenly parents” with “a divine nature and destiny.”
 And as a result of who you are—and who you can become—you can have a profound impact on those around you, not only in your jobs but also in your communities and, most important, in your homes.
Because you have lived in the unique environment that is Brigham Young University for the past few years, you may overlook the depth of the impact that those who become what the university and the gospel urge them to become can have on others on this campus.
In 2005, Naomi Schaeffer Riley wrote a book about religiously affiliated universities in the United States.
The book is entitled God on the Quad.
Riley began her book describing a speech given by author Tom Wolfe at a Class Day address at Harvard in which Wolfe described our current time frame as “the era of the ‘fifth freedom’—freedom from religion.” In a subsequent interview, Wolfe observed that in our society there has been a removal of what he called this “last hobble” on our freedom.
Having grown up in an environment that largely shared this very secularized view, Riley was intrigued by the increase in popularity of religiously affiliated universities, and she set out, in a somewhat skeptical manner, to visit some of those universities in order to explore what she called “the missionary generation” at America’s religiously affiliated universities.
Her first visit was to BYU.
She arrived on campus on September 10, 2001, the day before the date we now refer to as simply 9/11.
She described what happened as the events of 9/11 unfolded:
I began the first formal interviews for this book on September 10, 2001.
The next day, two thousand miles from home, I sat on the edge of my hotel bed, looking out over the strip malls to the treeless mountains beyond, wondering more than anything else about how to get home.
Home for me is Blue America.
I have lived in four states, all in the northeast.
I attended two secular colleges and grew up with a sense that religion, while socially beneficial . . . , was not true.
In other words, I had already expected to feel distinctly out of place on these campuses.
And the events of that Tuesday morning only intensified the feeling.
Over the next week, the students at Brigham Young [University] tried to welcome me into their lives.
While national tragedies tend to bring out the best in many people, the first representatives of the “missionary generation” I encountered could not have made a greater impression upon me.
Their kindness and compassion, their civic-mindedness, their understanding and interest in national and international affairs, the quiet comfort they were able to find in their faith, and their ability to relate to this stranger in their midst gave me cause for optimism.
These BYU students had a profound impact on Riley because they understood who they really were, and they were able to communicate that to her in a way that we may not always discern since we are already here.
You can have a similar impact on those around you if you understand and realize who you really are.
After describing her initial experience at BYU, Riley continued her introduction to the book by writing:
At the end of his Class Day address, Tom Wolfe worried that the “religious self-discipline that ran through the American people from one side to the other” and held this country together through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries has now disappeared. Wolfe predicted that the twenty-first century would be a period of “revaluation,” in which we will have to “create an entirely new ethical and moral framework.” Searching for a person who “[could] lead mankind into [such] a new era,” Wolfe asked his audience, “Where else should we find such a person but at Harvard?”
Riley then asked, tellingly, in the last words of her introduction, “Where else, indeed?”8 Her unwritten—but clear—answer is perhaps at places like BYU.
As you begin this next phase of your lives, do not underestimate your potential for good in the world.
Many in the world are searching for the kind of competence, compassion, and vision you have developed as a result of the gifts God has given you, including your education here.
If you will remember who you are—sons and daughters of heavenly parents with a divine purpose for your lives—you will find that who you are will define everything you do and that the things you do will make a profound difference in the world.
May it be so is my prayer, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

It is wonderful to see you all here this morning and to feel the joy, warmth, and enthusiasm you radiate.
I count it as one of the great blessings of my life that I have the opportunity to associate daily with such talented, consecrated people whose main focus is to provide our students with the kind of holistic learning experience that President Spencer W. Kimball called “education for eternity.”
 I am grateful beyond words to each of you for your efforts in that remarkable and remarkably rewarding enterprise.
I don’t think that anyone who has heard me speak this last year will be surprised that this year’s annual university conference theme—“Assist Individuals in Their Quest for Perfection and Eternal Life”—is a line from our mission statement.2 That deeply rich foundational document was the central focus of my remarks at this conference last year, and I have tried to mention it (if not make it the main theme) in the many speaking opportunities I have had since then. Given that effort, I couldn’t help but occasionally wonder if my almost obsessive emphasis on the mission statement was having any impact.
Was anyone listening?
Did anyone care?
Such inquiries usually end up being rhetorical.
But on occasion, heaven provides small but encouraging indications that the message is getting through—though sometimes in the most unexpected ways and in the most unanticipated places.
I suppose many of you have already seen this clip from a television show last month, but because it gives me a little boost every time I see it, I hope you don’t mind indulging me in showing one more time the segment of Jeopardy! that aired on July 23, 2015.3
Who knew that attendance at last year’s annual university conference would be preparation for a final Jeopardy! question? Given the answers of the first two contestants, maybe I should have given some emphasis to spelling and considered adding a veterinarian program to the university. In any event, I appreciate the publicity that the show gave to what is our unique mission to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.
In this last year we have seen some of the fruits of our long-term efforts to achieve that and the other goals set forth in the mission statement.
Those who arrived early at this session may have seen several examples in the pre-conference presentation on the beautiful new video display boards overhead. In fact, the video display boards themselves are partial fulfillment of one aspect of our mission.
The mission statement challenges us to provide “a stimulating setting” in which our students can pursue “the full realization of human potential.”4 The display boards will certainly make it easier for those who attend events here to be more fully immersed in and uplifted by the many different kinds of activities that occur here, from concerts to basketball games to performances and devotionals.
All will be more stimulating, thanks to the efforts of those who made the acquisition and installation of the video boards possible.
Let me also note the new seats in which you are seated.
There is no explicit reference to comfort in the mission statement, but surely the kind of learning that we hope occurs in this building will be enhanced by the fact that those who attend can focus on the words of the speakers or the skill of the performers and not on avoiding the embarrassment that comes from placing your knees into the back of the person in front of you or worrying about whether you will need to schedule a visit to your chiropractor because of the contortions required to fit into the allotted space.
I extend my personal appreciation to Physical Facilities, OIT, Special Events, and all the other organizations that in a very short window between Women’s Conference and August commencement provided an extreme makeover and greatly extended the life of this most important gathering place on our campus. It was truly a heroic effort by so many.
Equally impressive and equally impactful were the efforts of our physical facilities and grounds crew personnel to complete the second phase of our Campus Drive redesign, rendering the campus more beautiful, more pedestrian friendly, and overall more conducive to the kind of life-changing experience we hope our students have here. I also express appreciation to all of you who soldiered on through the construction delays and detours during the summer.
We know it was disruptive, but the end result is an enhancement of the stimulating setting in which our students will carry on this phase of their quest for perfection and eternal life.
Our mission statement also commits us to preparing our students in such a way and to such a degree that they are “capable of competing with the best in their fields.”5 There was ample evidence this past year that this is occurring on campus in a wide variety of ways.
For example, performers from BYU’s Theatre and Media Arts Department won more than fifteen awards at the Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival—eleven of which recognized students participating in Our Town, a reinvention of the American ­classic by the students who incorporated film into the live play.
A team of BYU accounting students earned first place at the national Deloitte FanTAXtic case study competition, where teams from more than 100 universities were asked to review the situation of a hypothetical company and recommend solutions based on their knowledge of tax law and practices. This is the ninth time in the past fourteen years that BYU has brought home the top prize.
The women’s volleyball team played in the national championship game, upsetting higher-ranked Arizona, Florida State, and Texas along the way and becoming the first unseeded tournament team ever to reach the national championship game.
And four BYU broadcast journalism students won Gracie Awards, national honors given by the Alliance for Women in Media to recognize the accomplishments of women in media and entertainment at the local, public, and student levels.
There are numerous other examples.
I don’t have time to mention them all, but I invite you to take note of and celebrate these kinds of successes in your individual colleges and departments.
In our journey up the mountain, we need to pause from time to time to enjoy the view that we have gained as a result of our combined efforts.
In short, we have accomplished a lot this year.
And as a result of the hard work and dedication of so many—not just this past year but for many decades—we are part of an extraordinary university with a strong foundation.
That fact is recognized by others who come here.
You all know that representatives of the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities, our main accreditation body, visited campus this past April.
I am happy to report that the visit went well and that we have recently been informed that our accreditation has been reaffirmed.
I express my appreciation to so many—especially Jim Gordon and his team—who worked so hard to achieve this result.
I could go on and on, but let me conclude this brief report on where we are and what we have accomplished by sharing with you the just-completed video produced by Julie Walker and her team in University Communications to introduce BYU to prospective students.6 It provides a general overview of what this university has become over the years and demonstrates that, as we look toward the future, we are built upon a very strong foundation. [The video was shown.]
It is clear that we are in a good place.
But we cannot stop now.
As President Kimball reminded us during his address “The Second Century of Brigham Young University,” there are still hills ahead of us and mountains left to climb.7 We have a remarkable history, and we are extraordinarily situated at the present. But what about the future? What can we do this year to better assist individuals in their quest for perfection? Where do we go from here? Those who attended my inauguration and have noted the references to mountains, hills, and climbing in my remarks so far today are probably expecting at this point to hear the refrains from the closing number of The Sound of Music and a call for us to “go to the mountains.”
I love that allusion and will return to it throughout my administration, but today I want to focus on particular aspects of that ascent that come from a complementary theme sounded in another address in that inauguration ceremony. While you may—or may not—have listened intently to my remarks last September, I paid most attention to the address given by President Henry B. Eyring. And I had a particular reason for doing so.
When the invitation to accept my current position came to me from the First Presidency early in 2014, I did not receive much by way of instruction—or at least I do not remember receiving much. I must confess that I experienced a bit of shock when the invitation came, so when I left the Church Administration Building that morning, I could not recall any particular charge or instruction about the course of the university or the focus I should have. It was not a particularly comforting feeling. Therefore I paid particular attention to what President Eyring said during the inauguration last September, hoping to find some direction in his remarks. And, as is usually the case when we concentrate on the words of prophets, I was amply rewarded, both in the moment of delivery and during subsequent reviews of his remarks.
What initially stood out to me was President Eyring’s statement that the course of this university had been set by its founder, Brigham Young, in a one-sentence declaration. Brigham Young said:
Put forth your ability to learn as fast as you can, and gather all the strength of mind and principle of faith you possibly can, and then distribute your knowledge to the people.8
Embedded in that profound sentence are three important insights. First, those of us at this university have an obligation to learn as fast as we can. Second, this kind of learning requires all the strength of both our minds and our faith. And third, our responsibility does not end when we have acquired all the knowledge that results from that kind of effort; we are required to distribute that knowledge to others—or, as President Eyring phrased it later in his remarks:
The vision at the founding was that all here will seek truth not for themselves alone but will also distribute what they have learned to bless others.9
Summarizing this view, President Eyring suggested that we have built and should continue to build on what he called this “shared vision of learning, teaching, and serving that has shaped this university.”
Now, some may think that this emphasis on learning, teaching, and serving applies only to the core academic enterprise and that President Eyring’s charge was aimed only at the faculty. It is true that this vision requires faculty who are continually learning, both in their particular substantive areas and in the common enterprise of teaching in which all faculty are involved. It is also true that the insights faculty gain in that endeavor are to be shared both with the students they teach and with others outside the university, including not only their peers in their disciplines but also others in the world at large. However, President Eyring made clear that this one-sentence charge from Brother Brigham was “a message to all in this enterprise” (emphasis added). No one is exempt. The charge is intended to have an effect, President Eyring said, on “those who study, teach, and serve here.” That seems to cover everyone: faculty, students, and staff.
It might also seem to describe the role of each of those groups. The students study, the faculty teaches, and the staff serve. However, I believe that this threefold description of learning, teaching, and serving not only makes clear that every person involved in this enterprise has a role to play but, more important, also describes the threefold responsibility that every person shares no matter what his or her particular role may be. In other words, I believe President Eyring’s charge was for all of us to engage in all aspects of the direction given by President Young. Let me reiterate Brigham Young’s instruction: Each of us—­faculty, staff, and students—are to “put forth [our] ability to learn as fast as [we] can, and gather all the strength of mind and principle of faith [we] possibly can, and then distribute [our] knowledge to the people.”
To quote President Eyring, “Students, faculty, and staff” (note again the universality of the charge) should be “driven by a desire and a strength of mind to learn as fast as they can” and then to share their knowledge in ways that serve the needs of others.
President Eyring then used a distinctive phrase to describe the kind of university this effort would produce: “This is a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters.” What a wonderful description this is of what we should be: a community of learners and lifters. I believe it is by creating a community of learners and lifters that we will best be able to play our individual roles in assisting individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.
Creating a community of learners and lifters is an ambitious and, I must admit, somewhat abstract goal. Just what does it mean at an operational level? I will confess that I don’t fully know the answer to that question, and I am inviting you today to begin a larger conversation about what it may mean to you both individually and as members of specific units on campus. However, let me offer a few more concrete thoughts that may help guide that conversation.
First, being part of a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters means that everyone should be using their strength of mind and faith to learn as much as they can about the field and enterprise in which they are engaged. For the faculty members this means that they need to be current—indeed, cutting edge—in their understanding of the discipline in which they are working. As faculty, we cannot simply dust off the notes of our classes that we have been using for years and teach from them. We must be involved in research, especially research that we can share with our students in some way. The result of this determined effort will be the discovery of new insights about both the specific substantive disciplines of the faculty and the methods of teaching that enhance learning.
But that same charge applies as well to those who work on the grounds crew or in the laundry or at the press or in dining services, technology, office work, or physical maintenance. There is something each of us can learn in our areas that will increase our knowledge and also increase our ability to perform our assigned tasks better.
But President Eyring’s charge is to go beyond the mere acquisition of abstract knowledge, as essential as that is. It is a charge to consider ways in which that knowledge can have a practical application in helping others. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell said:
Brigham Young University seeks to improve and “sanctify” itself for the sake of others—not for the praise of the world, but to serve the world better.10
The final requirement, then, is to look for opportunities to share that information with others so that their lives can be better. This may be easier for faculty who have a ready-made audience in the form of both students in their classrooms and peers in their discipline. But the charge extends to all involved in this enterprise. Each of us should look for ways to distribute the knowledge we have in such a way that it blesses others. For those in nonacademic units it may mean that you share the insights with coworkers or others engaged in similar activities outside the university or even with family members. For students it likely means sharing newly acquired knowledge with fellow students in class or other venues. And all of this sharing must be with the idea not of impressing others with how smart we are or how much information we know but with the desire to make others’ lives better.
Imagine a community in which all members are truly engaged in an individual and collective effort to use all their minds and faith to learn as much as they can and as fast as they can, with the ultimate goal of sharing insights with others to improve their lives. Surely that would be both a vibrant and a determined community, to use President Eyring’s phrase. And it would be a community that is alive with ideas and insights gained from a sustained, substantial desire to learn, as well as one with charity generated by that same kind of effort to use that knowledge to improve the lives of others.
We do not begin this effort at ground zero. As President Eyring noted, “Inspired leaders and teachers here have made it possible for students to begin to serve with what they have learned while they are still here” through mentored learning and other opportunities in which faculty invite students “to participate as partners in their own studies”—thereby lifting while they are learning.
Indeed, one of the distinctive traits of this university is the extent to which students have the opportunity to work with faculty members outside of class, including on specific research projects. In the most recent National Survey of Student Engagement survey of senior ­students, 36 percent of BYU seniors indicated that they had worked with a faculty member on a research project. That is 50 percent higher than the participation rate at other universities in our same Carnegie classification and even higher than that for other universities of our size.
Using data obtained from our alumni questionnaire and expanding the question to include any regular work with faculty outside the classroom, you can see the growth of faculty-student mentoring over the years, with the latest survey indicating that 49 percent of our students have had such a mentored learning experience before they graduate. Such experiences are invaluable preparation for so many things, including graduate school. Thus it is not surprising that the number of our alumni who three years after graduation have either completed or are in graduate school has also increased over the years—with the most recent data indicating that 40 percent of our alumni are in that category. While I understand the important difference between correlation and causation, I think it not entirely coincidental that those who have worked with a faculty member outside of class are more than twice as likely to attend graduate school as those who do not, as indicated by the data. Such one-on-one interaction is one prime example of the way in which faculty learners become lifters in the very process of learning.
For a number of reasons—including because we are beginning to reach the limits in some departments of the number of individualized experiences students can have on campus—we are increasingly relying on well-structured and well-planned off-campus internships in which we can partner with those outside our campus to provide transforming learning experiences to our students. Such experiences provide our students with both new opportunities to learn and additional venues in which to share what they have learned. We have over the years seen a marked increase in the percentage of our students who are taking advantage of these potentially transforming opportunities, with 56 percent of those in the most recent group for whom we have data having completed an off-campus internship while at BYU. Like mentored learning opportunities, internships can provide vital preparation for the next step our students will take in their quest for perfection and eternal life. Tellingly, in that regard, 49 percent of those who completed off-campus internships received a job offer in the subject matter of their internships.
Consistent with Brigham Young’s vision, the impact of such experiences is not limited to the students themselves. In many instances students are able to share what they have learned in ways that extend the impact of what happens here well beyond the borders of our campus. You may have seen the extensive media coverage generated by a group of BYU mechanical engineering students in Professor Mark Colton’s class.11 These students focused their capstone project on helping children in wheelchairs. Motorized pediatric wheelchairs can cost up to $10,000. They are often so heavy that they are not able to go up steep inclines—thereby limiting the things that their occupants can do. So this class set out to design a lightweight wheelchair that could be constructed for less than $500. The results are shown in a video. [A video was shown.]
NBC News and other media outlets highlighted the project. That prompted email inquiries to BYU from throughout the world. Let me share just two examples.
From Rohan Mehra, exhibition content developer, Science Museum, London:
I develop . . . exhibits on contemporary science and engineering at the Science Museum in London. We’re curious about potentially displaying a version of the wheelchair and interviewing the minds behind it. Do you know if a version could be provided (at our cost) for a period?
Frank Niendorff:
Very impressive project. After reading about the wheelchair, I am interested in finding out [whether] the plans, specs, and material lists are available. I live in Austin, TX, am retired, have a full workshop, and would very much like to make some of these wheelchairs and give them to the children’s hospital or other charitable organizations that support disabled children.
The last line of our mission statement expresses the firm belief that “the earnest pursuit of this institutional mission . . . will greatly enlarge Brigham Young University’s influence in a world we wish to improve.”12 The wheelchair project is exhibit A, offered as proof that establishing a vibrant and determined community of learners and lifters will better enable us to fulfill that charge.
With such persuasive evidence of the far-reaching and long-lasting positive impact of mentored learning and internships, it should be no surprise that we intend to make mentored learning and internship experiences a priority this year and in the years to come. We are looking for ways to increase both the number and quality of those opportunities for our students. We will use the endpoints of the rather impressive data of student involvement I cited today as the baseline for one measure of how successful we are in fulfilling our charge to become a community of learners and lifters.
As we do that, we anticipate that there will be even more interaction between our faculty and staff on the one hand and our students on the other. As this happens, I implore you not to focus solely on the secular knowledge you will be sharing with our students. For us to fulfill our charge to be learners and lifters in the eternal and most important sense, we must also engage in spiritual mentoring. As you interact with these wonderful young people, keep in mind President Kimball’s observation:
You can . . . be more effective in the service you render students if students see you as individuals who have blended successfully things secular and things spiritual in a way that has brought to you earned respect in both realms.13
In that regard, President J. Reuben Clark Jr.’s admonition to never let your faith be difficult to detect is fully applicable to this enterprise.14 I implore you not to hide what is most important to you and what will be most important to those whom you mentor. You can best help lift them at critical points in their quest for perfection and eternal life only if they clearly understand the true source of all knowledge and wisdom and service and power. We must ever point them to Him.
As we jointly and universally engage in the process of learning and lifting, we will create a community that is not only distinctive but in some ways unique. We have seen examples of that on this campus as well. As those who have been at BYU for some time will have discovered, employment slots, or FTEs, as we call them, are among the most valuable resources on campus. People can be hired to help in any part of campus only if there is an authorized FTE for that position, and those positions are limited. FTEs are sometimes more difficult to find than the funds to pay the salary. In most organizations, such precious resources would be carefully collected and guarded—and probably hoarded—within units. And yet, several years ago, the nonacademic support units on campus concluded that they could best help advance the mission of the university by consolidating their efforts and freeing up FTEs to be transferred to hire more faculty members. The six Teaching and Learning Faculty Fellowships announced this morning represent just a portion of the sacrifice made by the university’s support services to make that happen. This is a remarkable example of consecration that is not likely to be found in many, if any, other places.
A similar example occurred this past year. As many of you know, we have for the past few years been raising funds for a new addition to the engineering building. Despite strenuous efforts and generous donations by many, the project seemed somewhat stalled last fall. During that fundraising period, Dean Rod Brown of the College of Life Sciences noted that his college’s need for a new facility had been generously and fully funded by the Church. Having been blessed in that way, he wondered if there was anything the College of Life Sciences could do to help with the engineering project. After some discussion, the College of Life Sciences agreed to make a significant donation to the engineering project, using funds that could appropriately be repurposed in that way. Shortly thereafter, the Division of Continuing Education made a similar donation, and then Print and Mail Services followed suit. When these remarkable donations were announced at a meeting of our major donors this past spring, one donor—who has been involved with a number of ­universities—commented, “This kind of thing would not happen at any other university.” I believe he is right. This is a unique academic community in which people by nature lift and help one another in unexpected, and almost miraculous, ways.
Let me give one concluding example—one that is perhaps less dramatic but likely more representative of the often unnoticed ways in which learning and lifting occurs on this campus.
As many of you know, law school can be very competitive. At most law schools, including BYU’s, students are literally ranked in order by their grades, and employers often make the initial hiring decisions based primarily on that ranking. It is an environment rife with competition—looking at the other person, trying to better them. To add to the tension, in most law-school classes the seemingly all-important grade is determined solely on the basis of the final examination. As you might imagine, the stress levels at the law school are quite high during finals.
On one occasion I led a student discussion on pride and competition. In that setting, a first-year student, who had recently been through the soul-trying experience of the first set of law-school finals, related the following experience, which I share with his permission:
When I came to BYU Law School, I immediately developed a big, fat crush on my entire 1L class: they were the nicest, smartest, most interesting people that I had ever been around. . . . [Even though] I realized right away that I was outgunned, outsmarted, and outpaced in every class . . . , I didn’t resent the successes of my peers; they were . . . my friends, and I liked them. . . .
As classes ended, [however,] and our 1L class threw all its weight, collectively and individually . . . , toward finals, I was anxious. The anxiety grew and turned black. I studied hard and long, but I felt more insecure the more I studied.
The student went on to say that he began to stay away from his classmates because each interaction with them increasingly convinced him that they knew more than he did and that he was, therefore, destined to fail.
He then related:
I was praying early one morning about finals, asking for help to do my best [or even to just pass the class], and I began describing the bleak feelings I harbored, and I asked for help. After a few minutes, I [suddenly] found myself [praying] not [just] for myself but for my classmates, and not just for those few that I knew . . . struggled [with the material,] as I did, but for the gifted and the talented as well. I prayed that they would do their best, that they would have peace and clarity. As I prayed for them . . . , I felt a surge of love for the classmates I had admired and had liked so much in the beginning.
He then began to reengage with his fellow students, not just to learn from them but with the thought that he might actually have something he could offer to them. At that point his stress level dropped dramatically, his learning increased considerably, and his view of law school and life was transformed. He was a learner and a lifter whose lifting amplified his learning. Who knew that finals, especially law-school finals, could be a spiritual experience? They can—and should be—at BYU.
And so we look forward to the coming year with optimism, knowing that as we become a vibrant and dedicated community of learners and lifters, we will truly assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.
There will be challenges. Some of what we do will not win the praise of the world; indeed, some of the things we do may be ridiculed. Events around us will cause some to question our values and our course of action. We are ready to address such challenges in ways that I may explain more fully at a future time. In the meantime, we can all take comfort, as did I, in the words of President Eyring at last September’s inauguration:
In the midst of what may at times seem a tumult, [President Worthen] will be carried back to the view that is the heart of this university by the joy he has always found in being a determined learner and a mentor of other children of God. . . .
. . . He will then find himself saying quietly in the face of what appear to be crises, “Things will work out.”
I bear my witness that, as President Eyring testified, God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ live and that “They have been and always will be attentive to the needs of all who study and serve others here and who go on learning and serving others over their lifetimes and beyond.” As we follow that clearly marked path, we will be blessed and prospered. I so testify in the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen.

The program now calls for greetings by the president. Just what is really expected, however, is far from clear. One experienced president gave this sage advice to a new president about the role he should play at a commencement. “Think of yourself as the body at an Irish wake,” he said. “Your presence is necessary in order to have the party, but no one really expects you to say too much.” With that in mind, I would like to provide just a bit of context for today’s event.
The first graduation from this institution came at a time before it was a university. Brigham Young Academy, as it was then known, was formally established in 1875. For its first three decades it was more a combination grammar and secondary school than a university. At the end of the school’s first year, in 1876, the record indicates that “none of [the] students [had] advanced beyond the fifth reader level of grammar school,”1 so no one graduated. The first group to graduate from the Academy came a year later in June 1877, when two women and one man received diplomas recognizing their completion of the teacher preparation program.2 There is no record that any formal ceremony was held.
The first “collegiate diploma” was given four years later in 1881 to an exceptional student who had graduated from the high school a year earlier; his name was James E. Talmage.3 Talmage was so bright and accomplished that, for a short period of time, he was both a student and a teacher at the school.4
Things have changed a bit since that time. We no longer check to see if any of our students have gone beyond the fifth reader level of grammar school before we schedule a graduation ceremony, and no high school diplomas are given out. Moreover, we honor a lot more than three students. Today we will recognize more than 5,000 students who will receive bachelor’s degrees, nearly 700 who will receive master’s degrees, and 185 who will receive doctoral degrees. We have come a long way since those early years.
At the same time, we are more closely linked to the seemingly distant past than we may realize. As I mentioned, the first person to receive a collegiate degree from what is now BYU was James E. Talmage, who went on to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The oldest graduating student this year (who is seventy years old and who I congratulate today), was born more than a decade after Elder Talmage died in 1933. So I am certain that none of our graduates here today ever met the first recipient of a BYU college degree. Yet there is a direct connection between Elder Talmage and many of today’s graduates.
During his time as an educator, Elder Talmage personally mentored a bright young student named J. Reuben Clark Jr. As most of you know, J. Reuben Clark Jr. eventually became a member of the First Presidency of the Church. President Clark credited much of his success in life to the mentoring he received from Elder Talmage.5 Recognizing the profound impact such mentoring had had on him, President Clark reached out to bright young people in his sphere of influence to personally mentor them. Among that select group was Harold B. Lee, a future president of the Church. Following the same pattern, President Lee personally mentored a brilliant scholar and young Church leader named Neal A. Maxwell, another future member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Elder Maxwell in turn personally mentored a number of those whom he identified as potential leaders in the kingdom, including an incredibly bright young medical scholar named Cecil O. Samuelson, who I am confident has had a personal impact on many of the graduates here today and who I know has had a profound influence on me.
From Talmage to Clark to Lee to Maxwell to Samuelson and then to you and me—five direct links and we are back to the beginning of this institution, connected to the very first person to have received a college diploma from BYU.
But the connection to the past goes beyond mere mentoring genealogy. While many things have changed since the days when James E. Talmage was a student here, the core purpose and focus of this institution have remained the same. During his second year at the Academy, when he was just fifteen years old, Talmage enrolled in the newly formed Normal Department, organized to prepare teachers.6 Talmage kept notes of the lectures given to the department that year by Karl G. Maeser. A line from the notes of the first lecture states:
Education boasts of having the highest . . . aim of any avocation in life. The whole range has but one object and purpose, which is to bring us nearer the platform of our God. This object was set forth and pointed out by Christ himself: “Be ye perfect even as your father in heaven is perfect.” This should be a teacher’s watchword.7
That same aim—“to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life”8—remains the principal purpose of this university today, as the first line of our mission statement makes clear. It is a quest that will continue long after you leave this university, and indeed long after you have left this mortal existence. But it is the most important quest in which you will engage. May your education here and your use of that education to serve others in the future be productively employed to that end is my prayer in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.


